The following is a conversation with Daniel Schmacktenberger, a founding member of the
Consilience Project that is aimed at improving public sense making and dialogue.
He's interested in understanding how we humans can be the best version of ourselves as individuals
and as collectives at all scales.
Quick mention of our sponsors Groud News, Netsuite, FourSigmatic, MagixBoon, and BetterHelp.
Check them out in the description to support this podcast.
As a side note, let me say that I got a chance to talk to Daniel on and off the mic for a couple
of days. We took a long walk the day before our conversation. I really enjoyed meeting him,
just on a basic human level. We talked about the world around us with words that carried hope
for us individual ants actually contributing something of value to the colony. These conversations
are the reasons I love human beings, our insatiable striving to lessen the suffering in the world.
But more than that, there's a simple magic to two strangers meeting for the first time
and sharing ideas, becoming fast friends and creating something that is far greater than
the sum of our parts. I've gotten to experience some of that same magic here in Austin with
a few new friends and in random bars in my travels across this country.
Where a conversation leaves me with a big stupid smile on my face and a new appreciation
of this too short, too beautiful life. This is the Lex Friedman podcast and here is my
conversation with Daniel Schmacktenberger. If aliens were observing Earth through the
entire history just watching us and we're tasked with summarizing what happened until now,
what do you think they would say? What do you think they would write up in that summary?
Like it has to be pretty short, less than a page. Like in The Hitchhiker's Guide, there's I think
like a paragraph or a couple sentences. How would you summarize, sorry, how would the alien
summarize do you think all of human civilization? My first thoughts take more than a page.
They'd probably distill it. Because if they watched, well I mean first I have no idea if
their senses are even attuned to similar stuff to what our senses are attuned to or what the
nature of their consciousness is like relative to ours and so let's assume that they're kind of
like us just technologically more advanced to get here from wherever they are. That's the first
kind of constraint on the thought experiment. And then if they've watched throughout all of history
they saw the burning of Alexandria. They saw that 2000 years ago in Greece we were producing
things like clocks, the antikytheria mechanism and then that technology got lost. They saw that
there wasn't just a steady dialectic of progress. So every once in a while there's a giant fire
that destroys a lot of things. There's a giant like commotion that destroys a lot of things.
Yeah and it's usually self induced. They would have seen that. And so as they're looking at us
now as we move past the nuclear weapons age into the full globalization anthropocene exponential
tech age still making our decisions relatively similarly to how we did in the Stone Age as
far as rivalry game theory type stuff. I think they would think that this is probably most likely
one of the planets that is not going to make it to being intergalactic because we blow ourselves
up in the technological adolescence. And if we are going to we're going to need some major progress
rapidly in the social technologies that can guide and bind and direct the physical technologies
so that we are safe vessels for the amount of power we're getting.
Actually Hitchhiker's Guide has an estimation about how much of a risk this particular thing
poses to the rest of the galaxy. And I think I forget what it was. I think it was medium or low.
So their estimation would be that this species of ant like creatures is not going to survive long.
There's ups and downs in terms of technological innovation. The fundamental nature of their
behavior from a game theory perspective hasn't really changed. They have not learned in any
fundamental way how to control and properly incentivize or properly do the mechanism design
of games to ensure long term survival. And then they move on to another planet. Do you
think there is in a more slightly more serious question do you think there's
some number or perhaps a very very large number of intelligent alien civilizations out there?
Yes. It would be hard to think otherwise. I know I think Posterum had a new article not that long
ago on why that might not be the case. That the Drake equation might not be the kind of in
story on it. But when I look at the total number of Kepler planets just that we're aware of just
galactically and also when those life forms were discovered in Mono Lake that didn't have the same
six primary atoms that I think it had arsenic replacing phosphorus as one of the primary
aspects of its energy metabolism, we get to think about that the building blocks might be
more different. So the physical constraints even that the planets have to have might be more different.
It seems really unlikely not to mention interesting things that we've observed that
are still unexplained as you've had guests on your show discussing tic tac and oh the ones that
have visited. Yeah. Well let's dive right into that. What do you make sense of the rich human
psychology of there being hundreds of thousands probably millions of witnesses of UFOs of different
kinds on earth most of which I presume are conjured out by the human mind through the
perception system. Some number might be true some number might be reflective of actual physical
objects whether it's you know drones or testing military technology that's secret or otherworldly
technology. What do you make sense of all that because it's gaining quite a bit of popularity
recently. There is some sense of which that's us humans being hopeful and dreaming of otherworldly
creatures as a way to escape the dreariness of our of the human condition. But in another sense it
could be it really could be something truly exciting that science should turn its eye towards.
So what do you where do you place it. Speaking of turning eye towards this is one of those
super fascinating actually super consequential possibly topics that I wish I had more time
to study and just haven't allocated. So I don't have firm beliefs on this because I haven't got
to study it as much as I want. So what I'm going to say comes from a superficial assessment.
While we know there are plenty of things that people thought of as UFO sightings that we can
fully write off we have other better explanations for them. What we're interested in is the ones
that we don't have better explanations for and then not just immediately jumping to
a theory of what it is but holding it as unidentified and being being curious and earnest.
I think the the tic tac one is quite interesting and made it in major media recently but
I don't know if you ever saw the disclosure project.
A guy named Steven Greer organized a bunch of mostly US military and some commercial flight.
People who had direct observation and classified information disclosing it at a CNN briefing.
And so you saw high ranking generals admirals fighter pilots all describing things that they
saw on radar with visual with their own eyes or cameras and also describing some phenomena that
had some consistency across different people. And I find this interesting enough that I think it
would be silly to just dismiss it. And specifically like we can we can ask the question how much of
it is natural phenomena ball lightning or something like that. And this is why I'm more
interested in what fighter pilots and astronauts and people who are trained in
being able to identify flying objects and atmospheric phenomena have to say about it.
I think the thing then you could say well are they more advanced military craft.
Is it some kind of you know human craft. The interesting thing that a number of them describe
is something that's kind of like right angles at speed or not right angles acute angles at speed
but something that looks like a different relationship to inertia than physics makes
sense for us. I don't think that there are any human technologies that are doing that even in
really deep underground black projects. Now one could say OK well could it be a hologram.
What would it show up on radar radar is also seeing it. And so I don't know I think there's
enough I mean and for that to be a massive coordinated PSYOP is it as interesting and
ridiculous in a way as the idea that it's UFOs from some extra planetary source. So it's up
there on the interesting topics. To me there is if it is at all alien technology it is the dumbest
version of alien technology. It's so far away it's like the old old crappy VHS tapes of alien
technology. These are like crappy drones that just floated or even like space to the level of
like space junk because it is so close to our human technology. We talk about it moves in ways
that's that's unlike what we understand about physics but it still has very similar kind of
geometric notions and something that we humans can perceive with our eyes all those kinds of
things. I feel like alien technology most likely would be something that we would not be able to
perceive not because they're hiding but because it's so far advanced that it would be much it
would be beyond the cognitive capabilities of us humans just as you were saying as per your answer
for alien summarizing earth it's the starting assumption is they have similar perception
systems they have similar cognitive capabilities and that very well may not be the case. Let me ask
you about staying in aliens for just a little longer because I think it's a good transition
in talking about governments and human societies. Do you think if a US government or any government
was in possession of an alien spacecraft or of information related to alien spacecraft they would
have the capacity structurally would they have the the processes would they be able to
communicate that to the public effectively or would they keep it secret in a room and do nothing
with it both of to try to preserve military secrets but also because of the incompetence
that's inherent to bureaucracies or either? Well we can certainly see when certain things become
declassified 25 or 50 years later that there were things that the public might have wanted to know
that were kept secret for a very long time for reasons of at least supposedly national security
which is also a nice source of plausible deniability for people covering their
ass for doing things that would be problematic and other purposes.
There are there's a scientist at Stanford who supposedly got some material that was
recovered from Area 51 type area did analysis on it using I believe electron microscopy and a
couple other methods and came to the idea that it was a nanotech alloy that was something we
didn't currently have the ability to do was not naturally occurring. I've heard some things and
again like I said I'm not going to stand behind any of these because I haven't done the level of
study to have high confidence. I think what you said also about would it be super low tech alien
craft like would they necessarily move their atoms around in space or might they do something
more interesting than that might they be able to have a different relationship to the concept of
space or information or consciousness or one of the things that the craft supposedly do is not
only accelerate and turn in a way that looks not inertial but also disappear. So there's a question
as to like the two are not necessarily mutually exclusive and it could be possible to some people
run a hypothesis that they create intentional amounts of exposure as an invitation of a particular
kind. Who knows interesting field. We tend to assume like SETI that's listening up for aliens out
there. I've just been recently reading more and more about gravitational waves and you have
orbiting black holes that orbit each other. They generate ripples in space time
on my uh for fun at night when I lay in bed I think about what it would be like to ride those
waves when they not not the low magnitude they are as that when they reach earth but get closer
to the black holes because they'll basically be shrinking and expanding us in all dimensions
including time so it's actually ripples through space time that they generate.
Why is it that you couldn't use that it's travels at speed of light.
It travels at speed which a very weird thing to say when you're when you're uh morphing space time
it's it's it's you could argue it's faster than the speed of light so if you are able to communicate
by to summon enough energy to generate black holes and to orbit the uh to to force them to
orbit each other why not travel as the ripples in space time whatever the hell that means
somehow combined with wormholes so if you're able to communicate through like we don't think of uh
uh gravitational waves as something you can communicate with because the the radio will
be have to be the very large size of very dense but perhaps that's it you know perhaps that's one
way to communicate it's a very effective way and uh that would explain like we wouldn't even be able
to make sense of that of the physics that results in an alien species that's able to control gravity
at that scale i think you just jumped up the Kardashev scale so far so you're not just harnessing
the power of a star but harnessing the power of mutually rotating black holes um i i that's way
above my physics pay grade to think about including even uh non rotating black hole versions of
trans warp travel um i think uh you know you can talk with Eric more about that i think he has better
ideas on it than i do my hope for the future of humanity mostly does not rest in the near term
on our ability to get to other habitable planets in time and even more than that in the list of
possible solutions of uh how to improve human civilization uh orbiting black holes is not in
on the first page for you and not on the first page okay i bet you did not expect us to start
this competition here but i'm glad the places it went i am excited under my smallest scale of uh
mars europe or titan venus potentially having very like bacteria like life forms just on a
on a small human level it's a little bit scary but mostly really exciting that there might be life
elsewhere in the volcanoes and the oceans all around us teaming having little societies and
whether there's properties about that kind of life that's somehow different than ours i don't know
what would be more exciting if those colonies of single cell type organisms what would be more
exciting if they're different or they're the same if they're the same that means through the rest of
the universe there's life forms like us something like us everywhere if they're different that's also
really exciting because there's life forms everywhere they're not like us that's a little bit
scary i don't know what's scary actually i think both scary and exciting no matter what right the
idea that they could be very different and philosophically very interesting for us to
open our aperture on what life and consciousness and and self replicating possibilities could look like
the question on are they different or the same obviously there's lots of life here that is
the same in some ways in different in other ways um when you take the thing that we call an invasive
species is something that's still pretty the same hydrocarbon based thing but co evolved with
co selective pressures in a certain environment we move it to another environment it might be
devastating to that whole ecosystem because it's just different enough that it messes up the self
stabilizing dynamics of that ecosystem so the question of are they would they be different in
ways where we could still figure out a way to inhabit a biosphere together or fundamentally
not fundamentally the nature of how they operate and the nature of how we operate would be
incommensurable is a deep question well we offline talked about memetic theory right it seems like
if there were sufficiently different where we would not even we can coexist on different planes
it seems like a good thing if we're close enough together to where we'd be competing then it's
you're getting into the world of viruses and pathogens and all those kinds of things to where
we would uh one of us would die off quickly through basically mass murder without even even
accidentally even accidentally if we just had a self replicating single celled kind of creature
that happened to not work well for the hydrocarbon life that was here that got introduced because
it either output something that was toxic or utilized up the same resource too quickly and it
just replicated faster mutated faster it wouldn't be a um memetic theory conflict theory kind of
harm it would just be uh a von Neumann machine a self replicating machine that was fundamentally
incompatible with these kinds of self replicating systems with faster ootaloops for one final time
putting your alien flash god hat on and you look at human civilization the do you think about the
7.8 billion people on earth as individual little creatures individual little organisms or do you
think of us as uh one organism with a collective intelligence what's the proper framework through
which to analyze it again as an alien so that i know where you're coming from would you have asked
the question the same way before the industrial revolution before the agricultural revolution
when there were half a billion people and no telecommunications connecting them
i would indeed ask the question the same way but i would be less confident about
about your conclusions um it would be an actually more interesting way to ask the
question at that time but i was nevertheless asked it the same way yes well let's go back
further and smaller than uh rather than just a single human or the entire human species let's
look at uh in a relatively isolated tribe yes in the relatively isolated probably sub dunmar
number sub kind of 150 people tribe do i look at that as one entity where evolution is selecting
for based on group selection or do i think of it as 150 individuals um that are interacting in some
way well could those individuals exist without the group no uh the evolutionary adaptiveness of humans
was involved critically group selection and individual humans alone trying to figure out
stone tools and protection and whatever uh aren't what was selected for and so i think the or is
the wrong frame i think it's individuals are affecting the group that they're a part of
they're also dependent upon and being affected by the group that they're part of
and so this now starts to get in deep into political theories also which is theories
that orient towards the collective at different scales whether a tribal scale or an empire or
nation state or something and ones that orient towards the individual liberalism and stuff like
that and i think there's very obvious failure modes on both sides and so the relationship
between them is more interesting to me than either of them the relationship between the
individual and the collective and the question around how to have a virtuous process between
those so a good social system would be one where the organism of the individual and the organism
of the group of individuals is they're both synergistic to each other so what is best for
the individuals and what's best for the whole is aligned but there is nevertheless an individual
they're not it's uh it's a matter of degrees i suppose but what is uh what defines a human
more the the social network within the which they've been brought up through which they've
developed their intelligence or is it their own sovereign individual self
like what's your intuition of how much not just for evolutionary survival but as intellectual
beings how much do we need others for our development yeah i think we have a weird sense
of this today relative to most previous periods of sapient history i think the vast majority
of sapient history is tribal like depending upon your early human model two or three hundred
thousand years of homo sapiens in the little tribes where they depended upon that tribe for
survival and excommunication from the tribe was was fatal i think they and our whole evolutionary
genetic history is in that environment and the amount of time we've been out of it is is relatively
so tiny and then we still depended upon extended families and local communities more and the big
kind of giant market complex where i can provide something to the market to get money to be able
to get other things from the market where it seems like i don't need anyone it's almost like
disintermediating our sense of need even though even though you're in my ability to talk to each
other using these mics and the phones that we coordinated on took millions of people over
six continents to be able to run the supply chains it made all the stuff that we depend on but we
don't notice that we depend upon them they all seem fungible um if you take a baby obviously
that you didn't even get to a baby without a mom was it dependent we depend upon each other right
without two two parents at minimum and they depended upon other people but if we take that
baby and we put it out in the wild it obviously dies so if we let it grow up for a little while
the minimum amount of time where it starts to have some autonomy and then we put it out in the
wild and there this has happened a few times it doesn't learn language and it doesn't learn the
articulation the small motor articulation that we learn it doesn't learn the type of consciousness
that we end up having that is socialized so i think i think we take for granted how much
conditioning affects us um is it possible that uh it affects basically 99.9 or maybe the whole
thing the whole thing is the connection between us humans and there were no better than apes
without our human connections because that thinking of it that way forces us to think
very differently about human society and how to progress forward if the connections are fundamental
i just have to object to the no better than apes because better here i think you mean a specific
thing which means have capacities that are fundamentally different than i think apes also
depend upon troops um yes and i i think the idea of humans as better than nature in some kind of
ethical sense ends up having heaps of problems we'll table that we can come back to it but
when we say what is unique about homo sapien capacity relative to the other animals we currently
inhabit the biosphere with and i'm saying it that way because there were other early hominids
that had some of these capacities uh we believe our tool creation and our language creation and our
coordination are all kind of the results of a certain type of capacity for abstraction and
other animals will use tools but they don't evolve the tools they use they keep using the
same types of tools that they basically can find so a chimp will notice that a rock can cut a vine
that it wants to and it'll even notice that a sharper rock will cut it better and experientially
it'll use the sharper rock and if you even give it a knife it'll probably use the knife because
it's experiencing the effectiveness but it doesn't make stone tools because that requires
understanding why one is sharper than the other what is the abstract principle called sharpness
to then be able to invent a sharper thing that same abstraction makes language and the ability
for abstract representation which makes the ability to coordinate in a more advanced set of ways
so i do think our ability to coordinate with each other is pretty fundamental to the selection of
what we are as a species i wonder if that coordination that connection is actually the
thing that gives birth to consciousness that gives birth to well let's start with self awareness more
like theory of mind theory of mind yeah you know i i suppose there's experiments that show that
there's other mammals that have a very crude theory of mind i'm not sure maybe dogs something like
that but actually dogs probably has to do with that they co evolved with humans see it'd be
interesting if that theory of mind is what leads to consciousness in the way we think about it is
the richness of the subjective experience that is consciousness i have a inkling sense that that
only exists because we're social creatures that that doesn't come uh with this with the
hardware and the software any in the beginning that's like uh that's learned as an effective
uh tool for communication almost like we we think we i think we think uh that consciousness is
fundamental and uh maybe it's not uh there's um a bunch of folks kind of criticize the idea that
the illusion of consciousness is consciousness that it is just a facade we use to to uh help us
construct theories of mind you almost put yourself in the world as a subjective being
in that experience you want to reach the experience as an individual person so that i could empathize
with your experience i find that notion compelling mostly because it allows you to then create robots
that become conscious not by being quote unquote conscious but by just learning to fake it till
they make it is uh creative you know present the facade of consciousness and with it with the task
of uh making that facade very convincing to us humans and thereby it will become conscious
have a sense in that in some way that will make them conscious if they're sufficiently convincing
to humans is there some element of that that you uh you find convincing this is a much harder set of
questions and deep end of the pool than starting with the aliens was um we went from aliens to
consciousness this is not the trajectory i was expecting nor you but let us walk a while we
we can walk a while and i don't think we will do it justice so what do we mean by consciousness
versus conscious self reflective awareness what do we mean by awareness qualia theory of
mind there's a lot of terms that we think of as slightly different things and um subjectivity
first person uh i i don't remember exactly the quote but i remember when reading when sam
Harris wrote the book free will and then denet critiqued it and then there was some writing
back and forth between the two because normally they're on the same side of kind of arguing
for critical thinking and logical fallacies and philosophy of science against um supernatural
ideas and here denet believed there is something like free will he is a determinist
compatibilist but no consciousness and radical limitivist and sam was saying no there is consciousness
but there's no free will and that's like the most fundamental kinds of axiomatic senses they
disagreed on but neither of them could say was because the other one didn't understand the
philosophy of science um or logical fallacies and and they kind of spoke past each other and at
the end if i remember correctly sam said something that i thought was quite insightful which was to
the effect of it seems to because they weren't making any progress and shared understanding
it seems that we simply have different intuitions about this and what you could see was that
what the words meant right at the level of symbol grounding might be quite different
one of them might have had deeply different enough life experiences that what is being referenced
and then also different associations of what the words mean this is why when trying to address
these things charles sanders per said the first philosophy has to be semiotics because if you
don't get semiotics right we end up importing different ideas and bad ideas right into the
nature of the language that we're using and then it's very hard to do epistemology or ontology
together uh so i'm saying this to say why i don't think we're going to get very far is i think
we would have to go very slowly in terms of defining what we mean by words and fundamental
concepts um well and also allowing our minds to drift together for time so there are definitions
of these terms aligned i think there's some there's a beauty that some people enjoy with sam
that he is quite stubborn on his definitions of terms without often clearly revealing that
definition so in his mind he can like he could sense that he can deeply understand what he means
exactly by a term like free will and consciousness and you're right he's very he's very specific in
fascinating ways that not only does he think that free will is an illusion he thinks he's able
not thinks he says he's able to just remove himself from the experience of free will and just be
like for minutes at a time hours at a time like really experiences if he has no free will
like he's a a leaf flowing down the river and given that he's very sure that consciousness
is fundamental so here's a this conscious leaf that's subjectively experiencing the floating
the floating and yet there's no ability to control and make any decisions for for itself it's only a
the decisions have all all been made there's some aspect to which the terminology there perhaps
is the problem so that's a particular kind of meditative experience and the people in the
vedantic tradition and some of the buddhist traditions thousands of years ago described
similar experiences and somewhat similar conclusions some slightly different there are other types of
phenomenal experience that are the phenomenal experience of pure agency and you know like the
the catholic theologian but evolutionary theorist tear de chardon describes this and
that rather than a creator agent god in the beginning there's a creative impulse or a creative
process and he was would go into a type of meditation that identified as the pure essence
of that kind of creative process and I think the types of experiences we've had and then
one the types of experiences we've had make a big deal to the nature of how we do symbol
grounding the other thing is the types of experiences we have can't not be interpreted
through our existing interpretive frames and most of the time our interpretive frames are
unknown even to us some of them and so this is tricky this is a tricky topic
so I guess there's a bunch of directions we could go with it but I want to come back to what the
impulse was that was interesting around what is consciousness and how does it relate to us as
social beings and how does it relate to the possibility of consciousness with it a eyes
right you're keeping us on track which is which is wonderful you're a wonderful hiking partner
okay yes let's go back to the initial impulse of what is consciousness and how does the social
impulse connect to consciousness is consciousness a consequence of that social connection
I'm gonna state a position and not argue it because it's honestly like it's a long hard
thing to argue and we can totally do it another time if you want I don't subscribe
to consciousness as an emergent property of biology or neural networks
obviously a lot of people do obviously the the philosophy of science orients towards that in
not absolutely but largely I think of the nature of first person the universe of first person
of of qualia as experience sensation desire emotion phenomenology the but the the felt sense not the
we say emotion and we think of a neurochemical pattern or a integrand pattern but all of
the physical stuff the third person stuff has position and momentum and charge and stuff like
that that is measurable repeatable I think of the nature of first person and third person as ontologically
orthogonal to each other not reducible to each other they're different kinds of stuff and so I
think about the evolution of third person that we're quite used to thinking about from subatomic
particles to atoms to molecules to on and on I think about a similar kind of and corresponding
evolution in the domain of first person from the way whitehead talked about kind of prehension
or proto qualia in earlier phases of self organization and to higher orders of it and that
there's correspondence but that neither like the like the idealists do we reduce third person
to first person which is what idealists do or neither like the physicalists or do we reduce
first person to third person obviously bone talked about an implicate order that was deeper than
and gave rise to the explicate order of both natal talks about something like that I have a
slightly different sense of that but again I'll just kind of not argue how that occurs for a moment
and say so rather than say does consciousness emerge from I'll talk about do higher capacities of
consciousness emerge in relationship with so it's not first person as a category emerging from third
person but increase complexity within the nature of first person and third person co evolving do
I think that it seems relatively likely that more advanced neural networks have deeper phenomenology
more complex where it goes just from basic sensation to emotion to social awareness to
abstract cognition to self reflexive abstract cognition yeah but I wouldn't say that's the
emergence of consciousness I would say it's increased complexity within the domain of first
person corresponding to increased complexity and the correspondence should not automatically
be seen as causal we can get into the arguments for why that often is the case so what I say that
obviously the sapien brain is pretty unique and a single sapien now has that right even if it took
sapiens evolving in tribes based on group selection to make that brain so the group made it now that
brain is there now if I take that a single person with that brain out of the group and try to raise
them in a box they'll still not be very interesting even with the brain but the brain does give
hardware capacities that if conditioned in relationship can have interesting things emerge
so do I think that the the human biology types of human consciousness and types of social
interaction all co emerged and co evolved yes as a small aside as you're talking about the
biology let me comment that I spent this is what I do this is what I do with my life this is why
we'll never accomplish anything is I spent much of the morning trying to calculate trying to do
research on how many computations the brain performs and how many how much energy it uses
versus the state of the R CPUs and GPUs now arriving at about 20 quadrillion so that's 2 to the 10 to
the 16 computations so synaptic firings per second that the brain does and that's about a million
times faster than the the let's say the 20 thread state of the arts Intel CPU the the 10th generation
and then there's similar calculation for the for the for the GPU and all ended up also trying to
compute that it takes 10 watts to run the brain about and then what does that mean terms of calories
per day kilo calories that's about two for an average human brain that's 250 to 300 calories a
day and so it ended up being a calculation where you're doing about 20 quadrillion calculations
that that are fueled by something like depending on your diet three bananas so three bananas results
in in computation it's about a million times more powerful than the current state of the
computers now let's take that one step further there's some assumptions built in there the assumption
is that one what the brain is doing is just computation two the the relevant computations
are synaptic firings and that there's nothing other than synaptic firings that we have to
to factor so um i'm forgetting his name right now there's a very uh uh famous neuroscientists
at stanford just passed away recently who did a lot of the pioneering work on glial cells
and showed that his assessment glial cells did a huge amount of the thinking not just neurons and
it opened up this entirely different field of like what the brain is and what consciousness is
you look at demasio's work on embodied cognition and how much of what we would consider consciousness
or feeling is happening outside of the nervous system completely happening in endocrine process
involving lots of other cells and signal communication uh you talk to somebody like
penrose who you've had on the show and even though the penrose hammerhoff conjecture is
probably not right is there something like that that might be the case where we're actually having
to look at stuff happening at the level of quantum computation of microtubules i'm not arguing for
any of those i'm arguing that we don't know how big the unknown unknown set is well at the very
least this is this has become like an infomercial for the human brain at the very but wait there's
more at the very least the three bananas buys you a million times at the very least at the very
least and then you could have uh and and then the synaptic firings we're referring to is strictly
the electrical signals that could be the mechanical transmission of information like
this chemical transmission of information there's there's all kinds of other stuff going on
and there's memory that's built in that's also all tied in not to mention which i'm learning
more and more about it's not just about the uh the neurons it's also about the immune system
that's somehow helping with the computation so the entirety and the entire body is helping
with the computation so the three bananas they could buy you a lot you could buy you a lot
but on the topic of sort of uh the greater degrees of complexity emerging in consciousness
i think few things are as beautiful and inspiring as taking a step outside of the human brain
just looking at systems or simple rules create incredible complexity uh not create incredible
complexity emerges so one of the simplest things to do that with is uh cellular automata and there's
i don't know what it is and maybe you can speak to it we can certainly we will certainly talk about
the implications of this but there's so few things that are as awe inspiring to me as knowing the rules
of a system and not being able to predict what the heck it looks like and it creates incredibly
beautiful complexity that when zoomed out on looks like there's actual organisms doing things
that are much uh that operate on a scale much higher than the underlying mechanism so with
cellular automata that's cells that are born and die born or die and they only know about
each other's neighbors and there's simple rules that govern that interaction of birth and death
and then they create at scale organisms that look like they take up hundreds or thousands of cells
and they're moving they're moving around they're communicating they're sending signals to each
other and you forget at moment of the time before you remember that the simple rules on cells is all
that it took to create that that's it's sad in that we can't come up with a simple description of that
system that generalizes the behavior of the large organisms we can only come up we can only hope to
come up with the thing the fundamental physics or the fundamental rules of that system i suppose
it's sad that we can't predict everything we know about the mathematics of those systems it seems
like we can't really in a nice way like economics tries to do to predict how this whole thing will
unroll but it's beautiful because how simple it is underneath it all so what do you make of the
emergence of complexity from simple rules what the hell is that about yeah well we can see that
something like flocking behavior the murmuration can can be computer coded it's not a very hard set
of rules to be able to see some of those really amazing types of complexity and the whole field
of complexity science and some of the sub disciplines like stigma g are are studying how following
fairly simple responses to a pheromone signal do ant colonies do this amazing thing where the
what what you might describe as the organizational or computational capacity of the colony is so
profound relative to what each individual um ants is doing i am not um anywhere near as well versed
in the cutting edge of cellular automatas i would like unfortunately i in terms of topics that i
would like to get to and haven't like uh et's more um all forms a new kind of science i have only
skimmed and read reviews of and not read the whole thing or his newer work since um but
his idea of the four basic kind of categories of uh emergent phenomena that can come from
cellular automata and that one of them is kind of interesting and looks a lot like complexity
rather than just uh chaos or homogeneity or um self termination or whatever
i think this is very interesting it does not instantly make me think that
biology is operating on a similarly small set of rules and or that human consciousness is i'm
i'm not that reductionistly oriented and um so if you look at say santa fe institute one of the
cofounders to our kaufman um his work he should you should really get him on your show so a lot
of the questions that you like one of kaufman's you know more recent books after investigations
and some of the real fundamental stuff was called reinventing the sacred and it had to do with some
of these exact questions uh in kind of non reductionist approach but that is not just
silly hippieism um and he was very interested in highly non ergodic systems where you couldn't take
a lot of behavior over a small period of time and predict what the behavior of subsets over a
longer period of time would do um and then going further someone who spent some time at
santa fe institute and then kind of made a whole new field that you should have on uh dave snowden
who some people call the father of anthro complexity or what is the complexity unique to humans uh
uh he says something to the effect of that modeling humans as termites really doesn't
cut it like we we we don't respond exactly identically to the same pheromone stimulus using
stigmer g like it works for flows of traffic and some very simple human behaviors but it really
doesn't work for trying to make sense of the sistine chapel and picasso and general relativity
creation and stuff like that and it's because the the termites are not doing abstraction
forecasting deep into the future and making choices now based on forecasts of the future
not just adaptive signals in the moment and evolutionary code from history that's really
different right like making choices now that can factor deep modeling of the future um and with
humans our uniqueness one to the next in terms of response to similar stimuli is much higher
than it is with a termite um one of the interesting things there is that their uniqueness is extremely
low they're basically fungible within a class right the different classes but within a class
they're basically fungible and their system uses that very high numbers and lots of um loss right
do you think the termite feels that way don't don't you think we humans are deceiving ourselves
about our uniqueness perhaps it doesn't just isn't there some sense in which this emergence just
creates different higher and higher levels of abstraction where every at every layer each
organism feels unique is that possible the world i think you don't put in a different scales no i
think uniqueness is evolving i think that hydrogen atoms are more similar to each other than cells
of the same type are and i think that cells are more similar to each other than humans are
and i think that highly k selected species are more unique than our selected species so
they're different evolutionary processes they are selected species where you have a whole
a lot of death and very high birth rates you're not looking for as much individuality within
or individual possible expression to cover the evolutionary search space within an individual
you're looking at it more in terms of a numbers game um so yeah i would say there's probably more
difference between one orca in the next than there is between one cape buffalo in the next
given that it would be interesting to get your thoughts about mimetic theory where we're imitating
each other in the context of this idea of uniqueness how much truth is there to that how
compelling is this world view to you of gerardian mimetic theory of desire where maybe you can
explain it from your perspective but it seems like imitating each other is the fundamental
property of the behavior of human civilization well imitation is not unique to humans right
monkeys imitate um so a certain amount of learning through observing is not unique to humans humans
do more of it uh it's actually kind of worth speaking to this for a moment um monkeys can
learn new behaviors new we've even seen teaching an ape sign language and then the ape teaching
other apes sign language um so that's a kind of mimesis right kind of learning through imitation
and that needs to happen if they need to learn or develop capacities that are not just coded by
their genetics right so within the same genome they're learning new things based on the environment
and so based on someone else learn something first and so let's pick it up uh how much a creature is
the result of just its genetic programming and how much it's learning is a very interesting
question and i think this is a place where humans really show up radically different than
everything else and you can see it in the in the neotony how long we're basically fetal um
that a the closest ancestors to us if we look at a chimp a chimp can hold on to its mother's fur
while she moves around day one and obviously we see horses up and walking within 20 minutes
the fact that it takes a human a year to be walking and it takes a horse 20 minutes and you
say how many multiples of 20 minutes go into a year like that's a long period of helplessness
that wouldn't work for a horse right like they or anything else and and not only can we not hold
on to mom in the first day it's three months before we can move our head volitionally um so it's like
why why are we embryonic for so long basically that it's like like it's still fetal on the outside
had to be because couldn't keep growing inside and actually ever get out with big heads and
narrower hips from going upright um so here's a place where there's a co evolution of the pattern
of humans specifically here are our neotony and what that portends to learning with our
being tool making and environment modifying creatures which is because we have the abstraction
to make tools we change our environments more than other creatures change their environments the
next most environment modifying creature tusks is like a beaver and then you wear an la you fly
into lax and you look at the just orthogonal grid going on forever in all directions and you know
we we've recently come into the Anthropocene where the surface of the earth is changing more
for human activity than geological activity and then beavers and you're like okay wow we're really
in a class of our own in terms of environment modifying yeah um so as soon as we started
tool making we were able to change our environments much more radically we could put on clothes and
go to a cold place right and this is really important because we actually went and became apex
predators in every environment we functioned like apex predators but polar bear can't leave the arctic
right and the lion can't leave the savannah and an orca can't leave the ocean and we went and became
apex predators in all those environments because of our tool creation capacity we could become better
predators and them adapted to the environment or at least with our tools adapted to the environment
so then every aspect towards any organism in any environment were incredibly good at
becoming apex predators yes and nothing else can do that kind of thing there there is no other apex
predator that you see the other apex predator is only getting better at being a predator through
evolutionary process that's super slow and that super slow process creates co selective process
with their environment so as the predator becomes a tiny bit faster it eats more of the slow prey
the genes of the fast prey and breed and the prey becomes faster and so there's this kind of
balancing and we in because of our tool making we increased our predatory capacity faster than
anything else could increase its resilience to it as a result we started out stripping the
environment and extincting species following stone tools and going and becoming apex predator
everywhere this is why we can't keep applying apex predator theories because we're not an apex
predator we're an apex predator but we're something much more than that um like just for an example
the the top apex predator in the world in orca an orca can eat one big fish at a time like one tuna
and it'll miss most of the time or one seal and we can put a mile long drift net out on a single
boat and pull up an entire school of them right we can deplete the entire oceans of them that's
not an orca right like that's not an apex predator um and that's not even including that we can then
genetically engineer different creatures we can extinct species we can devastate whole ecosystems
we can make built worlds that have no natural things that are just human built worlds we can
build new types of natural creatures synthetic life so we are much more like little gods than
we are like apex predators now but we're still behaving as apex predators and little gods that
behave as apex predators causes a problem kind of core to my assessment of the world
so what does it mean to be a predator so a predator is uh somebody that effectively can
mine the resources from a place so for their survival or is it also just purely like higher
level objectives of violence and what is can predators be predators towards the same each
other towards the same species like are we think are we using the word predator sort of generally
which then connects to conflict and uh military conflict violent conflict in in this space of
human species obviously we can say that plants are mining the resources of their environment in a
particular way using photosynthesis to be able to pull minerals out of the soil and nitrogen and
carbon out of the air and like that um and we can say herbivores are being able to mine and
concentrate that so i wouldn't say mining the environment is unique to predator predator is
you know uh generally being defined as mining other animals right we don't consider herbivores
predators but um animal which requires some type of violence capacity because animals move plants
don't move so requires some capacity to uh overtake something that can move and try to get away um
we'll go back to the juridzing then we'll come back here why are we neoteness why are we embryonic
for so long because are we did we just move from the savannah to the arctic and we need to learn
new stuff if we came genetically programmed we would not be able to do that are we throwing
spears or are we fishing or are we running an industrial supply chain or are we texting what
is the adaptive behavior horses today in the wild and horses 10 000 years ago we're doing
pretty much the same stuff and so since we make tools and we involve our tools and then change
our environment so quickly and other animals are largely the result of their environment but we're
environment modifying so rapidly we need to come without too much programming so we can learn the
environment we're in learn the language right which is uh gonna be very important learn the
tool making learn the um and so we have a very long period of relative helpless of helplessness
because we aren't coded how to behave yet because we're imprinting a lot of software on how to behave
that is useful to that particular time so our mimesis is not it's not unique to humans but
the total amount of it is really unique and this is also where the uniqueness can go up right is
because we are less just the result of the genetics and that means the kind of learning
through history that they got coded in genetics and more the result of it's almost like our hardware
selected for software right like if evolution is kind of doing these think of as a hardware
selection i have problems with computer metaphors for biology but i'll use this one here um that
we have not had hardware changes since the beginning of sapiens but our world is really
really different and that's all changes in software right changes in on the same fundamental genetic
substrate what we're doing with these brains and minds and bodies and social groups and like that
and so um now giard specifically was looking at when we watch other people talking so we
learn language you and i would have a hard time learning mandarin today or it'd take a lot of
work we'd be learning how to conjugate verbs and stuff but a baby learns it instantly without
anyone even really trying to teach it just through mimesis so it's a it's a powerful thing
they're obviously more neuroplastic than we are when they're doing that and all their
attention is allocated to that but they're also learning how to move their bodies and
they're learning all kinds of stuff through mimesis one of the things that giard says is
they're also learning what to want and they learn what to want they learn desire by watching
what other people want and so intrinsic to this people end up wanting what other people want
and if we can't have what other people have without taking it away from them then that
becomes a source of conflict so uh the mimesis of desire is the fundamental generator of conflict
and that then the conflict energy within a group of people will build over time
this is a very very crude interpretation of the theory can we just pause on that for people who
are not familiar and for me who hasn't i'm loosely familiar but haven't internalized it but every
time i think about it's a very compelling view of the world whether it's true or not it's quite
it's like when you take everything Freud says is true it's a very interesting way to think about
the world and in the same way thinking about the memetic theory of desire that everything we want
is imitation of other people's wants we don't have any original wants we're constantly imitating
others and so and not just others but you know others we're exposed to so there's these like
little local pockets however define local of people like imitating each other and uh one
that's super empowering because then you can pick which group you can join like what what do you
want to imitate it's uh it's the old like you know whoever your friends are that's what your
life is going to be like that's really powerful i mean it's depressing that we're so unoriginal
but it's also liberating in that if this holds true that we can choose our life by choosing
the people we hang out with so okay thoughts that are very compelling that seem like they're more
absolute than they actually are end up also being dangerous we want communism um i'm i'm
gonna discuss here where i think we need to amend this particular theory but specifically you just
said something that everyone who's paid attention knows is true experientially which is who you're
around affects who you become and as as libertarian and self determining and sovereign as we'd like
to be um everybody i think knows that if you got put in the maximum security prison aspects of your
personality would have to adapt or you wouldn't survive there right you would become different
if you were if if you grew up in darfur versus finland you would be different with your same
genetics like just just no real question about that um and that even today if you hang out in a place
with ultramarathoners as your roommates or um all people who are obese as your roommates the
statistical likelihood of what happens to your fitness is pretty clear right like the behavioral
science of this pretty clear so uh the whole saying we are the average of the five people we
spend the most time around i think the more self reflective someone is the more time they spend by
themselves in self reflection the less this is true but it's still true so one of the best
things someone can do to become more self determined is be self determined about the environments
they want to put themselves in because to the degree that there is some self determination
and some determination by the environment don't be fighting an environment that is predisposing
you in bad directions try to put yourself in an environment that is predisposing the things
that you want in turn try to affect the environment in ways to predispose positive things for those
around you or perhaps also to there there's probably interesting ways to play with this you
could probably put yourself like form connections that have this perfect tension in all directions
to where you're actually free to decide whatever the heck you want because the set of wants within
your circle of interactions is so conflicting that you're free to choose whichever one so if
there's enough tension as opposed to everybody aligned like a flock of birds yeah i mean you
definitely want that all of the dialectics would be balanced so if you have someone who is extremely
oriented to self empowerment and someone who's extremely oriented to kind of empathy and compassion
both the dialectic of those is better than either of them on their own if you have both of them
inhabiting being inhabited better than you by the same person spending time around that person will
probably do well for you i think the thing you just mentioned is super important when it comes to
cognitive schools which is i think one of the fastest things people can do to improve their
learning and they're not just cognitive learning but their meaningful problem solving communication
and civic capacity capacity to participate as a citizen with other people and making the world
better is to be seeking dialectical synthesis all the time and so in the Hegelian sense if you have
a thesis you have an antithesis so maybe we have libertarianism on one side and marxist kind of
communism on the other side and one is arguing that the individual is the unit of choice and so
we want to increase the freedom and support of individual choice because as they make more
agentic choices it'll produce a better whole for everybody the other side saying well the
individuals are conditioned by their environment who would choose to be born into Darfur rather
than Finland so we actually need to collectively make environments that are good because that the
environment conditions the individuals so you have a thesis and an antithesis and then Hegel's
idea is you have a synthesis which is a kind of higher order truth that understands how those relate
in a way that neither of them do and so it is actually at a higher order of complexity so the
first part would be can I steal man each of these can I argue each one well enough that the
proponents of it are like totally you got that and not just argue it rhetorically but can I inhabit
it where I can try to see and feel the world the way someone seeing and feeling the world that way
would because once I do then I don't want to screw those people because there's truth in it right
and I'm not going to go back to war with them I'm going to go to finding solutions that could
actually work at a higher order if I don't go to a higher order then there's war and but then the
higher order thing would be well it seems like the individual does affect the commons and the
collective and other people it also seems like the collective conditions individuals at least
statistically and I can cherry pick out the one guy who got out of the ghetto and pulled himself
up by his bootstraps but I can also say statistically that most people born into the ghetto
show up differently than most people born into the Hamptons and so unless you want to argue that
and have you take your child from the Hamptons and put them in the ghetto then like come on be
realistic about this thing so how do we make we don't want social systems that make weak dependent
individuals right the welfare argument but we also don't want no social system that supports
individuals to do better we want we don't want individuals where their self expression and agency
fucks the environment and everybody else and employs slave labor and whatever so can we make
it to where individuals are creating holes that are better for conditioning other individuals can
we make it to where we have holes that are conditioning increased agency and sovereignty
right that would be the synthesis so the thing that I'm coming to here is if people have that as
a frame and sometimes it's not just thesis nante thesis it's like eight different views right
can I steal man each view this is not just can I take the perspective but am I seeking them am I
actively trying to inhabit other people's perspective then can I really try to essentialize
it and argue the the best points of it both the sense making about reality and the values
why these values actually matter then just like I want to seek those perspectives then I want to
seek is there a higher order set of understandings that could fulfill the values of and synthesize
the sense making of all of them simultaneously maybe I won't get it but I want to be seeking it
and I want to be seeking progressively better ones so this is perspective seeking driving
perspective taking and then seeking synthesis I think that that one cognitive disposition
might be the most helpful thing would you put a title of dialectic synthesis on that process
because that seems to be such a part so like this rigorous empathy like like it's not just empathy
it's empathy with rigor like you really want to understand and embody different worldviews and
then try to find a higher order synthesis okay so I remember last night you told me when we first
met you said that you looked in somebody's eyes and you felt that you had suffered in some ways
that they had suffered and so you could trust them sure shared pathos right creates a certain
sense of kind of shared bonding and shared intimacy so empathy is actually feeling the
suffering of somebody else and feeling the the depth of their sentience I don't want to fuck
them anymore and I mean I hurt them I don't want to behave in a I don't want my proposition to go
through when I go and inhabit the perspective of the other people they feel that's really going to
mess them up right and so the rigorous empathy it's different than just compassion which is I
generally care like I have a generalized care but I don't know what it's like to be them I can never
know what it's like to be them perfectly and that there's a humility you have to have which is my
most rigorous attempt is still not it my most rigorous attempt mine to know what it's like
to be a woman is still not it I have no question that if I was actually a woman it would be different
than my best guesses I have no question if I was actually black it's be different than my best guesses
so there's a humility in that which keeps me listening because I don't think that I know fully
but I want to and I'm going to keep trying better to and then I want to across them and then I want
to say is there a way we can forward together and not have to be in war it has to be something that
could meet the values that everyone holds it could reconcile the partial sense making that
everyone holds and they could offer a way forward that is more agreeable than the partial perspectives
that were with each other but the more you succeeded this empathy with humility the more
you're carrying the burden of their of other people's pain essentially now this goes back to
the question of do I see us as one being or 7.8 billion I think them if I'm overwhelmed with
my own pain I can't empathize that much because I don't have the bandwidth I don't have the capacity
if I don't feel like I can do something about a particular problem in the world it's hard to
feel it because it's just too devastating and so a lot of people go numb and even go nihilistic
because they just don't feel the agency so as I actually become more empowered as an individual
and have more sense of agency I also become more empowered to be more empathetic for others and
be more connected to that shared burden and want to be able to make choices on behalf of and in
and in benefit of so this way of living seems like a way of living that would solve a lot of
problems in society from a cellular automata perspective so if you have a bunch of little
like little agents behaving in this way my intuition there'll be interesting complexities
that are merged but my intuition is it will create a society that's very different and
recognizably better than the one we have today how much like oh wait hold that question because I
want to come back to it but this brings us back to Jared which we didn't answer the conflict theory
yes because about how to get past the conflict theory yes you know the Robert Frost poem about
the two paths he never had time to turn back to the other we're gonna have to do that quite a lot
we're gonna be uh living that poem over and over again but yes how how to uh let's return back
okay so the rest of the argument goes you learn to want what other people want therefore fundamental
conflict based in our desire because we want the thing that somebody else has and then people are
they're in conflict over trying to get the same stuff power status attention physical stuff
a mate whatever it is and then the we learn the conflict by watching and so then the conflict
becomes a medic so the and you know we become on the the Palestinian side of the Israeli side of
the communist like capitalist side or the left or right politically or whatever it is and until
eventually the conflict energy in the system builds up so much that some type of violence is needed
to get the bad guy whoever it is that we're gonna blame and you know Jorard talks about why scapegoating
was kind of a mechanism to minimize the amount of violence let's blame let's blame it a set a
scapegoat as being more relevant than they really were but if we all believe it then we can all kind
of calm down with the conflict energy it's a really interesting concept by the way i mean you went
you beautifully summarized it but the idea that there's a scapegoat that there's a this kind of
thing naturally still conflict and then they find the other some group that's the other that's either
real artificial as the cause of the conflict well it's always artificial because the cause of the
conflict in jorard is the mimesis of desire itself and how do we attack that how do we attack that
it's our own desire so this now gets to something more like buddha said right which was desire as
the cause of suffering um jorard and buddha would kind of agree in this way so and so but that's
that explains i mean again it's a compelling description of human history that we do tend to
come up with the other and okay kind of i just i just had such a funny experience with someone
critiquing jorard the other day in such a elegant and beautiful and simple way it's a a friend who's a
uh grew up aboriginal australian uh is a scholar of aboriginal social technologies and he's like
nah man jorard just made shit up about how tribes work like we come from a tribe we've got tens of
thousands of years and we didn't have increasing conflict and then scapegoat and kill someone
we'd have a little bit of conflict and then we would dance and then everybody'd be fine
like we'd dance around the campfire everyone would like kind of physically get the energy out
we'd look in each other's eyes we'd have positive bonding and then we're fine and nobody no scapegoats
and i think that's called the joe rogan theory of desire which is uh he's like all all of human
problems have to do with the fact that you don't do enough hard shit in your day uh so maybe maybe
just dance it because he says like doing exercise and running on that treadmill gets gets all the
demons out maybe just dancing gets all the demons out so this is why i say we have to be careful
with taking an idea that seems too explanatory and then taking it as a given and then saying well
now that we're stuck with the fact that conflict is inexorable because human because mimetic desire
and therefore how do we deal with the inexorability of the conflict and how to sublimate violence
no the whole thing might be actually gibberish meaning it's only true in certain conditions
and other conditions it's not true so the deeper question is under which conditions is that true
under which conditions is it not true what do those other conditions make possible and look like
and in general we should stay away from really compelling models of reality because there's
something about about our brains that these models become sticky and we can't even think outside of
them so it's not that we stay away from them it's that we know that the model of reality is never
reality that's the key thing humility again it goes back to just having the humility that you
don't have a perfect model of reality there's an the the model of reality could never be reality
the process of modeling is inherently information reduction and i can never show that the unknown
unknown set has been factored um it's back to the cellular automata you can't you can't uh put the uh
genie back in bottle like uh when you realize it's unfortunately sadly impossible to um
um to create a model of cellular automata even if you know the basic rules that predict to even
any degree of accuracy what uh um how that system will evolve which is fascinating mathematically
sorry i i think about it quite a lot it's very annoying wolfram has this rule 30 like you should
be able to predict it it's so simple but you can't predict what's going to be like there's a there's a
problem he defines like try to predict some aspect of the middle middle column of the system just
anything about it what's going to happen in the future and you can't you can't it sucks because
then we can't make sense of this world in a real in a reality in a definitive way it's always like
in the striving like it we're always striving yeah i don't think this sucks that so that's a feature
not a bug well that's assuming a designer um i would say i don't think it sucks i think it's
not only beautiful but maybe necessary for beauty the mess so you're uh so you're you're
disagree jordan pierce you should clean up your room see you like the rooms messy it's uh it's
essential for the for beauty it's not it's not that it's okay i take i have no idea if it was
intended this way and so i'm just interpreting it a way i like the commandment about having no false
idols to me the way i interpret that is meaningful is that reality is sacred to me i have a reverence
for reality but i know my best understanding of it is never complete i know my best model of it
is a model where i tried to make some kind of predictive capacity by reducing the complexity
of it to a set of stuff that i could observe and then a subset of that stuff that i thought was the
causal dynamics and then some set of you know mechanisms that are involved and what we find
is that it can be super useful like newtonian gravity can help us do ballistic curves and
all kinds of super useful stuff and then we get to the place where it doesn't explain what's happening
at the cosmological scale or at a quantum scale and at each time what we're finding is uh we
exclude itself and it also doesn't explain the reconciliation of gravity with quantum mechanics
and the other kind of fundamental laws and the so models can be useful but they're never true with
a capital t meaning they're never an actual real full they're never a complete description of what's
happening in real systems they can be a complete description of what's happening in an artificial
system that was the result of applying a model so the model of a circuit board and the circuit
board are the same thing but i would argue that the model of a cell and the cell are not the same
thing and i would say this is key to what we call complexity versus the complicated which is a
distinction davis noden made well um in defining the difference between simple complicated complex
and chaotic systems um but one of the definers in complex systems is that no matter how you model
the complex system it will still have some emergent behavior not predicted by the model
can you elaborate on the complex versus the complicated complicated means we can fully
explicate the phase space of all the things that it can do we can program it uh all human
not all for the most part human built things are complicated they don't self organize
they don't self repair they're not self evolving and we can make a blueprint for them
um where sorry for human systems for human technologies human technologies sorry so okay
so so not that are basically the application of models right right and engineering is kind
of applied science science as the modeling process and but with but humans are complex
complex stuff with biological type stuff um and sociological type stuff it more has generator
functions and even those can't be fully explicated than it has or our explanation can't prove that
it has closure of what would be in the unknown unknown set where we keep finding like oh it's
just the genome oh well now it's the genome and the epigenome and then a recursive change on the
epigenome because of the proteome and then there's mitochondrial dna and then virus is affected
and fuck right so it's like we get overexcited when we think we found the thing so on facebook
you know how you can list your relationship as complicated it should actually say it's it's complex
that's the more accurate description you uh self terminating is a really interesting idea that you
talk about quite a bit first of all what is a self terminating system and i think you have a
sense correct me if i'm wrong that human civilization as it currently is is a self terminating system
um why do you have that intuition combined with the definition of what's of self terminating
means okay so if we look at human societies historically human civilizations uh it's not
that hard to realize that most of the major civilizations and empires of the past don't
exist anymore so they had a life cycle they died for some reason so we don't still have in it
the early egyptian empire or inka or maya or aztec or any of those right and so
they they terminated sometimes it seems like they were terminated from the outside in war
sometimes it seems like they self terminate when we look at easter island it was a self
termination um so let's go ahead and take an island situation if i have an island and we
are consuming the resources on that island faster than the resources can replicate themselves and
there's a finite space there that system is going to self terminate it's not going to be able to
keep doing that thing because you'll get to a place of there's no resources left and then you get uh
so now if i'm utilizing the resources faster than they can replicate or faster than they
can replenish and i'm actually growing our population in the process i'm even increasing
the rate of the utilization of resources i might get an exponential curve and then hit a wall and
then just collapse the exponential curve rather than do an s curve or some other kind of thing
um so self terminating system is any system that depends upon a substrate system that is
debasing its own substrate that is debasing what it depends upon so you're right that uh if you
look at empires they rise and fall throughout human history but but not this time bro where
where this one's gonna last forever that's i like that idea i think that if we don't understand why
all the previous ones failed we can't ensure that and so i think it's very important to understand
it well so that we can have that be a designed outcome with some what decent probability so
we're it's sort of in terms of consuming the resources on the island we're a clever bunch
and we keep coming up especially when the on the horizon there is a termination point
we keep coming up with clever ways of avoiding disaster of avoiding collapse of constructing
this is where technological innovation this is where growth comes in coming up with different
ways to improve productivity and the way society functions such that we consume less resources
or get a lot more from the resources we have so there's some sense in which there's a human
ingenuity is a source for optimism about the future of this particular system that that may
not be self terminating if if there's more innovation than there is consumption so over
consumption of resources just one way i think can self terminate we're just kind of starting here but
there are reasons for optimism and pessimism then they're both worth understanding and there's
failure modes on understanding either without the other as we mentioned previously there
there's what i would call naive techno optimism naive techno capital optimism
that says stuff just has been getting better and better and we wouldn't want to live in the dark
ages and tech has done all this awesome stuff and we know the proponents of those models and
this stuff is going to kind of keep getting better of course there are problems but human
ingenuity rises to its apply and demand will solve the problems whatever would you put raker as well
on that or in that bucket is there some specific people you have in mind or naive optimism is
truly naive to where you're essentially just have an optimism that's blind to any kind of realities
of the way technology progresses i don't think that anyone who thinks about it and writes about
it is perfectly naive gotcha but there might play time it's a platonic ideal there there might be a
bias in the nature of the assessment i would also say there's kind of naive techno pessimism
and there are
critics of technology i mean you read the unabombers manifesto on why technology can't
not result in our self termination so we have to take it out before it gets any further
but also if you read a lot of the ex risk community you know boss drum and friends it's like our
total number of existential risks and the total probability of them is going up
and so i think that there are we have to hold together where our positive possibilities and our
risk possibilities are both increasing and then say for the positive possibilities to be realized
long term all of the catastrophic risks have to not happen any of the catastrophic risks happening
is enough to keep that positive outcome from occurring so how do we ensure that none of them
happen if we want to say let's have a civilization that doesn't collapse so again collapse theory
it's worth looking at books like the collapse of complex societies by joseph tainter it does an
analysis of that many of the societies fell for internal institutional decay civilizational decay
reasons bowdryard in simulation and simulacra looks at a very different way of looking at how
institutional decay and the collective intelligence of a system happens and it becomes kind of more
internally parasitic on itself um obviously jarrod diamond made a more popular book called collapse
and as we were mentioning the anti catheria mechanism has been getting attention in the
news lately but it's like a 2000 year old clock right like like metal gears and
and does that mean we lost like 1500 years of technological progress um and from a society
that was relatively technologically advanced um so what i'm interested in here is being able to
say okay well why did previous societies fail can we understand that abstractly enough that we can
and make a civilizational model that isn't just trying to solve one type of failure but solve
the underlying things that generate the failures as a whole are there some underlying generator
functions or patterns that would make a system self terminating and can we solve those and have
that be the kernel of a new civilizational model that is not self terminating and can we then be
able to actually look at the categories of extras we're aware of and see that we actually have
resilience in the presence of those not just resilience but anti fragility and i would say
for the optimism to be grounded it has to actually be able to understand the risk space well and have
adequate solutions for it so can we try to dig into some basic intuitions about the underlying
sources of catastrophic failures of the system and overconsumption that's built in into
self terminating systems so both the overconsumption which is like the slow death and then there's the
fast death of nuclear war and all those kinds of things a agi biotech bioengineering nanotechnology
nano my favorite nanobots okay nanobots are my favorite because it sounds so cool to me
that i could just know that i would be one of the scientists that would be full steam ahead
in building them without sufficiently thinking about the negative consequence i would definitely be
i would be podcasting all about the negative consequences but when i go back home i'd be
i just in my heart know the amount of excitement is a dumb descendant of ape no offense to apes
so i want to backtrack on my previous comments about negative comments about apes
that i have that sense of excitement that would result in problems so sorry a lot of things said
but what can we start to pull it a thread because you've also provided kind of a beautiful
general approach to this which is this dialectic synthesis or just rigorous empathy whatever
whatever word we're going to put to it that seems to be from the individual perspective
is one way to sort of live in the world as we try to figure out how to construct non self
terminating systems so what what are some underlying sources yeah first i have to say
uh i i actually really respect Drexler for emphasizing gray goo and engines of creation
back in the day um to make sure the world was paying adequate attention to the risks of the
the nanotech um as someone who was right at the cutting edge of what could be um
there's definitely game theoretic advantage to those who focus on the opportunities and
don't focus on the risks or pretend there aren't risks um because they get to market first um and
then they externalize all of the costs through limited liability or whatever it is to the commons
or wherever happened to have it other people are going to have to solve those but now they have the
power and capital associated the person who looked at the risks and tried to do better design and go
slower um is probably not going to move into positions of as much power influence as quickly
so this one of the issues we have to deal with is some of the the bad game theoretic dispositions
in the system relative to its own um stability and the key aspect of that sorry to interrupt is
the externalities generated yes what flavors of catastrophic risk are we talking about here
what's your favorite flavor in terms of ice cream so mine is coconut nobody seems to like
coconut ice cream uh so ice cream aside what's uh what do you most worry about there's a catastrophic
risk that will help us kind of um make concrete the the the discussion we're having about how to
fix this whole thing yeah i think it's worth taking a historical perspective briefly to just
kind of orient everyone to it we don't have to um go all the way back to the aliens who've seen all
of civilization but to just recognize that um for all of human history as far as we're aware
there were existential risks to civilizations and they happened right like there were civilizations
that were killed in war um that tribes that were killed in tribal warfare or whatever so
people faced existential risk to the group that they identified with it's just those were local
phenomena right they it wasn't a fully global phenomena so an empire could fall in surrounding
empires didn't fall maybe they came in filled the space um the first time that we were able to
think about catastrophic risk not from like a solar flare or something that we couldn't control but
from something that humans would actually create at a global level was world war two in the bomb
because it was the first time that we had tech big enough that could actually
mess up everything at a global level that could mess up habitability we just weren't
powerful enough to do that before it's it's not that we didn't behave in ways that would have
done it we just you only behaved in those ways at the scale we could affect and so it's important
to get that there's the entire world before world war two where we don't have the ability to make a
non habitable biosphere non habitable for us and then there's world war two and the beginning
of a completely new phase where global human induced catastrophic risk is now a real thing
and that was such a big deal that it changed the entire world in a really fundamental way
which is you know when you study history it's amazing how big a percentage of history is
studying war right in the the history of wars you study european history whatever it's generals
and wars and empire expansions and and so the the major empires near each other never had really
long periods of time where they weren't engaged in war or preparation for war or something like
that was humans don't have a good precedent in the post tribal phase the civilization phase of
being able to solve conflicts without war for very long world war two was the first time where
we could have a war that no one could win and so the superpowers couldn't fight again they
couldn't do a real kinetic war they could do diplomatic wars and cold war type stuff and
they could fight proxy wars through other countries that didn't have the big weapons
and so mutually assured destruction and like coming out of world war two we actually realized
that nation states couldn't prevent world war and so we needed a new type of of supervening
government in addition to nation states which was the whole bread and woods world the united
nations the world bank the imf the globalization trade type agreements mutually assured destruction
that was how do we have some coordination beyond just nation states between them
since we have to stop war between at least the superpowers and it was pretty successful
given that we've had like 75 years of no superpower on superpower war
we've had lots of proxy wars during that time we've had you know cold war
and i would say we're in a new phase now where the bread and wood solution is basically over
almost over you described the bread most solution yeah so the bread and woods the series of agreements
for how the nations would be able to engage with each other in a solution other than war
was these igos these intergovernmental organizations and was the idea of globalization
since we could have global effects we needed to be able to think about things globally
where we had trade relationships with each other where it would not be profitable to war with
each other be more profitable to actually be able to trade with each other so our own self
interest was you know going to drive our non more interest and so this started to look like
and obviously this this couldn't have happened that much earlier either because industrialization
hadn't gotten far enough to be able to do massive global industrial supply chains and ship stuff
around you know quickly but like we were mentioning earlier almost all the electronics that we
used today just basic cheap stuff for us is made on six continents made in many countries there's
no single country in the world that could actually make many of the things that we have and from the
raw material extraction to the plastics and polymers and the you know etc and so the idea
the idea that we made a world that could do that kind of trade and create massive gdp growth we
could all work together to be able to mine natural resources and grow stuff with the rapid gdp growth
there was the idea that everybody could keep having more without having to take each other's
stuff and so that that was part of kind of the the breton woods post world war two model the other
was that we would be so economically interdependent that blowing each other up would never make sense
that worked for a while now it also brought us up into planetary boundaries faster the
unrenovable use of resource and turning those resources into pollution on the other side of
the supply chain so obviously that faster gdp growth meant uh the overfishing of the oceans
and the cutting down of the trees and the climate change and the uh mining toxic mining tailings
going into the water and the mountaintop removal mining and all those types of things that's the
over consumption side of the of the risk that we're talking about and so the answer of let's do
positive gdp is the answer rapidly and exponentially obviously accelerated the planetary boundary side
and that started to be that that was thought about for a long time but it started to be modeled
with the club of rome and limits of growth um and it but it's just very obvious to say if you
have a linear materials economy where you take stuff out of the earth faster whether it's fish
or trees or or or and you take or oil and you take it out of the earth faster than it can replenish
itself and you turn it into trash after using it for a short period of time you put the trash
in the environment faster than it can process itself and there's toxicity associated with
both sides of this you can't run an exponentially growing linear materials economy on a finite
planet forever that's not a hard thing to figure out and it has to be exponential if there's an
exponentiation in the monetary supply because of interest and then fractional reserve banking
and to then be able to keep up with the growing monetary supply you have to have growth of goods
and services and so that's that kind of thing that has happened um but you also see that when
you get these supply chains that are so interconnected across the world you get increased fragility
because a collapse or a problem in one area then affects the whole world in a much bigger area
as opposed to the issues being local right so we got to see with covid and an issue that started
in one part of china affecting the whole world so much more rapidly than would have happened
before breton woods right before international travel supply chains you know that whole kind of
thing and with a bunch of second and third order effects that people wouldn't have predicted okay we
have to stop certain kinds of travel because of viral contaminants but the countries doing agriculture
depend upon fertilizer they don't produce that is shipped into them and depend upon pesticides
they don't produce so we got both crop failures and crops being eaten by locusts in scale in
northern africa and iran and things like that because they couldn't get the supplies of stuff
in so then you get massive starvation or future kind of hunger issues because of supply chain
shutdowns so you get this increased fragility and cascade dynamics where a small problem can
end up leading to cascade effects and also we went from two superpowers with one catastrophe weapon
to now that same catastrophe weapon is there's more countries that have it eight or nine countries
that have it and there's a lot more types of catastrophe weapons we now have catastrophe
weapons with weaponized drones that can hit infrastructure targets with bio with in fact
every new type of tech has created an arms race so we have not with the un or the other kind of
intergovernmental organizations we haven't been able to really do nuclear deproliferation we've
actually had more countries get nukes and keep getting faster nukes the race to hypersonics and
things like that and every new type of technology that has emerged has created an arms race and so
you can't do mutually assured destruction with multiple agents the way you can with two agents
two agents it's a much easier to create a stable Nash equilibrium that's forced but the ability
to modern say if these guys shoot who do I shoot do I shoot them do I shoot everybody do I and so
you get a three body problem you get a very complex type of thing when you have multiple
agents and multiple different types of catastrophe weapons including ones that can be much more
easily produced than nukes nukes are really hard to produce there's only uranium in a few areas
uranium enrichment is hard ICBMs are hard but weaponized drones hitting smart targets is not
so hard there's a lot of other things where basically the scale at being able to manufacture
them is going way way down to where even non state actors can have them and so when we talk about
exponential tech and the decentralization of exponential tech what that means is decentralized
catastrophe weapon capacity and especially in a world of increasing numbers of people feeling
disenfranchised frantic whatever for different reasons so I would say where the Bretton Woods
world doesn't prepare us to be able to deal with lots of different agents having lots of different
types of catastrophe weapons you can't put mutually assured destruction on where you can't
keep doing growth of materials economy in the same way because of hitting planetary boundaries
and where the fragility dynamics are actually now their own source of catastrophic risk so now
we're so like there was all the world until world war two and world war two is just from a
from a civilization timescale point of view is just a second ago it seems like a long time but
it is really not we get a short period of relative peace at the level of superpowers while building
up the military capacity for much much much worse war the entire time and then now we're at this new
phase where the things that allowed us to make it through the nuclear power are not the same
systems that will let us make it through the next stage so what is this next post Bretton Woods
how how do we become safe vessels safe stewards of many different types of exponential technology
is a key question when we're thinking about ex risk okay so and I'd like to try to answer the
how a few a few ways but first on the mutually assured destruction do you give credit to the
idea of two superpowers not blowing each other up with nuclear weapons to the simple game
theoretic model of mutually assured destruction or something you've said previously this idea
of inverse correlation which I tend to believe between the now you were talking about tech but
I think it's maybe broadly true the inverse correlation between competence and propensity
for destruction so the better the the bigger your weapons not because you're afraid of mutually
assured self destruction but because we're human beings and there's a deep moral fortitude there
that's somehow aligned with competence and being good at your job that like it's very hard to be
a psychopath and be good at killing at scale is do you share any of that intuition kind of
I think most people would say that Alexander the great and Genghis Khan and Napoleon were
effective people that were good at their job that were actually maybe asymmetrically good
at being able to organize people and do certain kinds of things that were pretty oriented towards
certain types of destruction or pretty willing to maybe they would say they were oriented towards
empire expansion but pretty willing to commit certain acts of destruction in the name of it
what are you worried about the Genghis Khan or you could argue he's not a psychopath
that are you worried about Genghis Khan are you worried about Hitler are you worried about
a terrorist who is has a very different ethic which is not even for it's not trying to preserve
and build and expand my community it's more about just the destruction in itself is the goal
I think the thing that you're looking at that I do agree with is that there's a psychological
disposition towards construction and a psychological disposition more towards destruction obviously
everybody has both and can toggle between both and oftentimes one is willing to destroy certain
things we have this idea of creative destruction right willing to destroy certain things to create
other things and utilitarianism and trolley problems are all about exploring that space
and the idea of war is all about that I am trying to create something for our people
and it requires destroying some other people
sociopathy is a funny topic because it's possible to have very high fealty to your in group and
work on perfecting the methods of torture to the out group at the same time because you can
dehumanize and then remove empathy and I would also say that there are types so the reason the
thing that gives hope about the orientation towards construction and destruction being a little
different in psychology is what it takes to build really catastrophic tech even today where it
doesn't take what it took to make a new small group people could do it takes still some real
technical knowledge that required having studied for a while and some in building capacity and
there's a question of is that psychologically inversely correlated with the desire to
damage civilization meaningfully a little bit a little bit I think I think a lot I think it's
actually I mean this is the conversation I had like what I think offline with Dan Carlin
which is like it's pretty easy to come up with ways that any competent I can come up with a lot
of ways to hurt a lot of people and it's pretty easy like I alone could do it and
like there's a lot of people as smarter smarter than me at least in their creation of explosives
why are we not seeing more insane mass murder I think there's something fascinating and beautiful
about this yes and it does have to do with some deeply pro social types of characteristics in
humans and but when you're dealing with very large numbers you don't need a whole lot of a
phenomena and so then you start to say well what's the probability that x won't happen this year
then won't happen in the next two years three years four years and then how many people are
doing destructive things with lower tech and then how many of them can get access to higher
tech that they didn't have to figure out how to build so when I can get commercial tech and maybe
I don't understand tech very well but I understand it well enough to utilize it not to create it
and I can repurpose it when we saw that commercial drone with a homemade thermite bomb hit the
Ukraine Ukrainian munitions factory and do the equivalent of an incendiary bomb level of damage
that's just home tech that's just simple kind of thing and so the question is not
what is does it stay being a small percentage of the population the question is does can you
bind that phenomena nearly completely and especially now when you as you start to get
into bigger things crisper gene drive technologies and various things like that can you bind it
completely long term over what period of time not perfectly though that's the thing I'm trying
I'm trying to say that there is some let's call it that's a random word love that's inherent in
that's core to human nature that's preventing destruction at scale and you're saying yeah
but there's a lot of humans there's going to be eight plus billion and then there's a lot of seconds
in the day to come up with stuff there's a lot of pain in the world that can lead to a distorted
view of the world such that you want to channel that pain into the destruction all those kinds
of things and it's only a matter of time that anyone individual could do large damage especially as
we create more and more democratized decentralized ways to deliver that damage even if you don't
know how to build the initial weapon you can but the thing is it seems like it's a race between
the cheapening of destructive weapons and the capacity of humans to express their love
towards each other and it's a race that so far I know on Twitter it's not popular to say but love
is winning okay so what is the argument that love is going to lose here against nuclear weapons of
biotech and and AI and and drones okay I'm gonna come at the end of this to a how love wins so I
just want you to know that that's where I'm oriented that's the end but I'm I'm gonna argue
against why that is a given because it because it's not a given I don't believe and I think this
is like a good romantic comedy so you're gonna create drama right now but it will end with a
happy ending well it's because it's only a happy ending if we actually understand the issues well
enough and take responsibility to shift it do I believe like there's a reason why there's so much
more dystopic sci fi than protopic sci fi and the in the sum protopic sci fi usually requires magic
is because or at least magical tech right dilithium crystals and warp drives and stuff
because it's very hard to imagine people like the people we have been in the history books
with exponential type technology and power that don't eventually blow themselves up that
make good enough choices as stewards of their environment and their commons and and each other
and etc so like it's easier to think of scenarios where we blow ourselves up than it is to think
of scenarios where we avoid every single scenario where we blow ourselves up and when I say blow
ourselves up I also I mean the environmental versions the terrorist versions the war versions
the cumulative externalities versions um can I and I'm sorry if I'm interrupting your flow of
thought but why is it easier is it could it be a weird psychological thing where we either I'm
just more capable to visualize explosions and destruction and then the sicker thought which
is like we kind of enjoy for some weird reason thinking about that kind of stuff even though we
wouldn't actually act on it it's almost like some weird uh like I love playing shooter games
you know uh first person shooters and like especially if it's like murdering zombie and doom
you're shooting demons I play one of my favorite games diabolus like slashing through different
monsters and the screaming and pain and the hellfire and then I go out into the real world uh to eat
my coconut ice cream and I'm all about love so I got that can we trust our ability to visualize
how all it all goes to shit as an actual rational way of thinking I think it's a fair question to
say to what degree is there just kind of perverse fantasy and um morbid exploration and whatever
else that happens in our imagination uh but I don't think that's the whole of it I think there is
also a reality to the combinatorial possibility space and the difference in the probabilities
that there's a lot of ways I could try to put the 70 trillion cells of your body together that don't
make you there's not that many ways I can put them together that make you there's a lot of ways I
could try to connect the organs together that make some weird kind of group of organs on a on a
desk but that doesn't actually make a functioning human and and you can kill an adult human in a
second but you can't get one in a second takes 20 years to grow one and a lot of things to happen
right I could destroy this building in a couple minutes with demolition but it took a year or
a couple years to build it there is uh I'm down cold this is just an example it's not he doesn't
mean it there's a there's a gradient where entropy is easier and there's a lot more ways to put a
set of things together that don't work than the few that really do produce higher order synergies
and so when we look at a history of war and then we look at exponentially more powerful warfare
norm's race it drives out in all these directions and when we look at a history of environmental
destruction and exponentially more powerful tech that makes exponential externalities
multiplied by the total number of agents that are doing it in the cumulative effects
there's a lot of ways the whole thing can break like a lot of different ways and for it to get
ahead it has to have none of those happen and so there's just a probability space where it's easier
to imagine that thing so what so to say how do we have a protopic future we have to say well
one criteria must be that it avoids all of the catastrophic risks so can we understand can we
inventory all the catastrophic risk can we inventory the patterns of human behavior that give rise to
them and could we try to solve for that and could we have that be the the essence of the social
technology that we're thinking about to be able to guide bind and direct a new physical
technology because so far our physical technology like we were talking about the Genghis Khan's
and like that that obviously use certain kinds of physical technology and armaments and also
social technology and unconventional warfare for a particular set of purposes but we have things
that don't look like warfare like Rockefeller and Standard Oil and it looked like a constructive
mindset to be able to bring this new energy resource to the world and it did and the second
order effects of that are climate change and all of the oil spills that have happened and will
happen and all of the wars in the Middle East over the oil that have been there and the massive
political clusterfuck and human life issues that are associated with it and on and on right and so
it's also not just the orientation to construct a thing can have a narrow focus on what I'm trying
to construct but be affecting a lot of other things through second and third order effects I'm not
taking responsibility for and you often another tangent mentioned second third and fourth order
effects and order and and fascinating which is really fascinating like starting with the third
order plus it gets really interesting because we don't we don't even acknowledge like the second
order effects right but like thinking because those it could map it could get bigger and bigger
and bigger in ways we're not anticipating so how do we make those so it sounds like part of the
part of the thing that you are thinking through in terms of a solution how to create an anti
fragile a resilient society is to make explicit acknowledge understand the externalities the
second order third order fourth order and the order effects how do we start to think about those
effects yeah the war application is harm we're trying to cause or that we're aware we're causing
right the externality is harm that at least supposedly we're not aware we're causing or
at minimum it's not our intention right maybe we're either totally unaware of it or we're aware
of it but it is a side effect of what our intention is it's not the intention itself
there are catastrophic risks from both types the direct application of increased technological
power to a rival risk intent which is going to cause harm for some out group for some in group
to win but the out group is also working on growing the tech and if they don't lose completely they
reverse engineer the tech up regulated come back with more capacity so there's the exponential tech
arms race side of in group out group rivalry using exponential tech that is one set of risks
and the other set of risks is the application of exponentially more powerful tech not intentionally
to try and beat an out group but to try to achieve some goal that we have but to produce a second
and third order effects that do have harm to the commons to other people to environment to other
groups that might actually be bigger problems than the problem we were originally trying to
solve with the thing we were building when facebook was building a dating app and then
building a social app where people could tag pictures they weren't trying to build a democracy
destroying app uh that would maximize time on site as part of its ad model through ai
optimization of a news feed to the thing that made people spend most time on site which is usually
them being limbically hijacked more than something else which ends up appealing to people's cognitive
biases and group identities and creates no sense of shared reality they weren't trying to do that
but it was a second order effect and it's a pretty fucking powerful second order effect
and a pretty fast one because the rate of tech is obviously able to get distributed to much larger
scale much faster and with a bigger jump in terms of total vertical capacity then that's what it
means to get to the verticalizing part of an exponential curve so um just like we can see
that oil had these second order environmental effects and also social and political effects
war and so much of the whole like the total amount of oil used is has a proportionality to
total global GDP and this way we have this you know the petrodollar and um and so the the oil
thing also had the externalities of a major aspect of what happened with military industrial
complex and things like that so but we can see the same thing with with more current technologies
with facebook and google um and and other things so i don't think we can run and the more powerful
the tech is we build it for reason x whatever reason x is maybe x is three things maybe it's
one thing right we we're doing the oil thing because we want to make cars because it's a
better method of individual transportation we're building the facebook thing because we're going
to connect people socially in the personal sphere but it it interacts with it interacts with complex
systems with ecologies economies psychologies cultures and so it has effects on other than the
thing we're intending some of those effects can end up being negative effects but because this
technology if if we make it to solve a problem it has to overcome the problem the problem's been
around for a while it's going to overcome in a short period of time so it usually has greater
scale greater rate of magnitude in some way that also means that the externalities that it creates
might be bigger problems and you can say well but then that's the new problem and humanity will
innovate its way out of that well i don't think that's paying attention to the fact that we can't
keep up with exponential curves like that nor do finite spaces allow exponential externalities
forever and this is why a lot of the smartest people thinking about this are thinking well
no i think we're totally screwed and unless we can make a benevolent ai singleton that
rules all of us um you know guys like boss drum and and others uh thinking in those directions
because they're like how do humans try to do multi polarity and make it work and i i have a
different answer of what i think it looks like that does have more to do with the love but some
applied social tech aligning aligned with love because i have a bunch of really dumb ideas i
prefer to uh i'd like to hear i'd like to hear some of them first i think the idea i would have is
uh to be a bit more rigorous in trying to measure the amount of love you add or subtract from the
world in second third fourth fifth order effects it's actually i think especially in the world of
tech quite doable you know you just might not like you know the the shareholders may not like
that kind of metric but it's pretty easy to measure like that's not even uh um perhaps half
joking about love but we could talk about just happiness and well being long term well being
that's pretty easy from facebook for youtube for all these companies to measure that
they do a lot of kinds of surveys they could do i mean there's very simple solutions here
that you can just survey how i mean servers are in some sense use useless because they're um
a subset of the population you're just trying to get a sense it's very loose kind of understanding
but integrated deeply as part of the technology most of our tech is recommender systems most of the
sorry not tech uh online interaction is driven by recommender systems that learn very little data
about you and use that data based on mostly based on traces of your previous behavior to
suggest future things this is how twitter this is facebook works this is how uh adsense for google
adsense works is how netflix youtube work and so on and and for them to just track as opposed to
engagement how much you spend in a particular video particular site is also track give you the
technology to do self report of what makes you feel good of what makes you grow as a person
of what makes you uh you know the best version of yourself the the the the rogan uh idea of
the hero of your movie and just add that little bit of information if you you have people you have
this like happiness surveys of how you feel about the last five days how would you report
your experience you can lay out the set of videos this is kind of fascinating to me i don't know if
you ever look at youtube the history of videos you've looked at it's fascinating it's very embarrassing
for me like you'll be like a lecture and then like a set of videos that i don't want anyone to know
about which is which is which will be like uh i don't know maybe like five videos in a row where
it looks like i watched the whole thing which i probably did i bought like how to cook a steak
even though or just like the best chefs in the world cooking steaks and i'm just like
sitting there watching it for no purpose whatsoever wasting away my life or like funny
cat videos or like legit that doesn't that's always a good one and i could look back and rate
which videos made me a better person and not and i mean on a more serious note there's a bunch of
conversations podcasts or lectures i've watched which made me a better person and some of them
made me a worse person uh quite honestly not for stupid reasons like i feel dumber but because i do
have a sense that that started me on a path of um of not being kind to other people for example
i'll give you uh for my own and i'm sorry for rantic but maybe there's some usefulness to this
kind of exploration of self when i focus on creating on programming on science i'd become
a much deeper thinker and a kinder person to others when i listen to too many a little bit
is good but too many podcasts or videos about how how our world is melting down or criticizing
ridiculous people the worst of the quote unquote woke for example all there's all these groups
that are misbehaving in fascinating ways because they've been corrupted by power the more i what
the more i watch criticism of them the worse i become and i'm aware of this but i'm also aware
that for some reason it's pleasant to watch those sometimes and so for for me to be able to self
report that to the youtube algorithm to the systems around me and they ultimately try to optimize to
make me the best person the best version of myself which i personally believe would make youtube a
lot more money because i'd be much more willing to spend time i need to have been given youtube a
lot more a lot more of my money that's uh that's great for business and great for humanity because
it'll make me a kinder person it'll increase the the love quotient the love metric and uh it'll
make them a lot of money i feel like everything's aligned and so you you should do that not just
for youtube algorithm but also for military strategy and for this to go to war or not
because one externality you can think of about going to war which i think we talked about offline
is we often go to war with kind of governments with uh with not with the people you have to think
about the kids of countries that see a soldier and because of what they experience the interaction
with the soldier hate is born when you're like eight years old six years old you lose your dad
you lose your mom you lose a friend somebody close to you that want a really powerful externality
that could be reduced to love positive and negative is uh the hate that's born when you
make decisions and that's going to take fruition that that little seed is going to become a tree
that then leads to the kind of destruction that we talk about uh so but in my sense it's possible
to reduce everything to a measure of how much love does this add to the world
all that to say uh do you have ideas of how we practically uh build systems
that that that create a resilient society there are a lot of good things that you shared where
there's like 15 different ways that we could enter this that are all interesting so i'm
trying to see which one will probably be most useful pick the uh the one or two things that are
least ridiculous when you're mentioning if we could see some of the second order effects
or externalities that we aren't used to seeing specifically the one of a kid being radicalized
somewhere else which engenders enmity and them towards us which decreases our own future security
even if you don't care about the kid if you care about the kids the whole other thing um yeah i mean
i think when we saw this when jane fonda and others went to vietnam and took photos and videos
of what was happening and you got to see the pictures of the kids with napalm on them uh that
like the anti war effort was bolstered by that in a way it couldn't have been without that there's
there's a until we can see the images you can't have a mere neuron effect in the same way and when
you can that starts to have a powerful effect i think there's a deep principle that you're
sharing there which is that if we we can have a rivalrous intent where our in group whatever
it is maybe it's our political party wanting to win within the us maybe it's our nation state wanting
to win in a a war or an economic war over resource or whatever it is that if we don't obliterate the
other people completely they don't go away they're they're not engendered to like us more
or they're they didn't become less smart so they have more enmity towards us and whatever
technologies we employed to be successful they will now reverse engineer make iterations on
and come back and so you you drive in arms race which is why you can see that the wars were over
history employing more lethal weaponry and not just the kinetic war um the information war and
the narrative war and the economic war right like it just increased capacity in all of those fronts
and so what seems like a win to us on the short term might actually really produce losses in the
long term and what's even in our own best interest in the long term is probably more aligned with
everyone else because we inter affect each other and i think the thing about globalism
globalization and exponential tech and the rate at which we affect each other and the rate at which
we affect the biosphere that we're all affected by is that this this kind of proverbial spiritual
idea that we're all interconnected and need to think about that in some way that was easy for
tribes to get because everyone in the tribe so clearly saw their interconnection independence
on each other but in terms of a global level the the speed at which we are actually interconnected
the speed at which the harm happening to something in Wuhan affects the rest of the world or a new
technology developed somewhere affects the entire world or an environmental issue or whatever
is making it to where we either actually all get not as a spiritual idea just even as physics right
we all get the interconnectedness of everything and that we either all consider that and see how
to make it through more effectively together or failures anywhere in that becoming decreased
quality of life and failures and increased risk everywhere don't you think people are beginning
to experience that at the individual level so governments are resisting it they're they're
trying to make us not empathize with each other feel connected but don't you think people are
beginning to feel more and more connected like isn't that exactly what the technology is enabling
like social networks we tend to criticize them but isn't there a sense which we're experiencing you
know yeah when you watch those videos that are criticizing whether it's the woke antifa side
or the QAnon Trump supporter side does it seem like they have increased empathy for people
that are outside of their ideologic camp not at all so I may be I may be conflating my own
experience of the world and that of that of the populace I I tend to see those videos
as feeding something that's a relic of the past they figured out that drama fuels clicks but
whether I'm right or wrong I don't know but I tend to sense that that is not that hunger for drama
is not fundamental to human beings that we want to actually that we want to understand antifa
and we want to like empathize we want to take radical ideas and be able to empathize with them
and synthesize it all okay let's look at cultural outliers in terms of violence versus
compassion we can see that a lot of cultures have relatively lower in group violence bigger
out group violence and there's some variants in them in variants of different times based on the
scarcity or abundance of resource and other things but you can look at say Jains whose whole
religion is around nonviolent so much so that they don't even hurt plants they only take fruits that
fall off them and stuff or to go to a larger population you take Buddhists where for the most
part with a few exceptions for the most part across three millennia and across lots of
different countries and geographies and whatever you have 10 million people plus or minus who don't
hurt bugs the whole spectrum of genetic variants that is happening within a culture of that many
people um and head traumas and whatever and nobody hurts bugs and then you look at a group where
the kids grew up as child soldiers and Liberia or Darfur were to make it to adulthood pretty much
everybody's killed people hand to hand and killed people who were civilian or innocent type of people
and you say okay so we were very in the oddness we can be conditioned by our environment and humans
can be conditioned where almost all the humans show up in these two different bell curves it
doesn't mean that the buddhas had no violence it doesn't mean that these people had no compassion
but the they're very different Gaussian distributions and so I think one of the important
things that I like to do is look at the examples of the populations what Buddhism shows regarding
compassion or what Judaism shows around education the average level of education that everybody
gets because of a culture that is really working on conditioning it or various cultures what are
the positive deviants outside of this statistical deviance to see what is actually possible and
then say what are the conditioning factors and can we condition those across a few of them
simultaneously and could we build a civilization like that becomes a very interesting question
so there's this kind of real politic idea that humans are violent large groups of humans become
violent they become irrational specifically those two things rivalrous and violent and
irrational and so in order to minimize the total amount of violence and have some good decisions
they need ruled somehow and that not getting that as some kind of naive utopianism that doesn't
understand human nature yet this gets back to like mimesis of desire as an inexorable thing
I think the idea of the masses is actually a kind of propaganda that is useful for the classes that
control to popularize the idea that most people are too violent lazy undisciplined and irrational
to make good choices and therefore their choices should be sublimated in some kind of way I think
that if we look back at these conditioning environments we can say okay so the kids that
go to a really fancy school and have a good developmental environment like exeter academy
there's still a Gaussian distribution of how well they do on any particular metric
but on average they become senators and the worst ones become high end lawyers or whatever
and then I look at the inner city school with a totally different set of things and I see a very
very differently displaced Gaussian distribution but a very different set of conditioning factors
so then I say the masses well if all those kids who were one of the parts of the masses got to go
to exeter and have that family and whatever would they still be the masses um could we actually
condition more social virtue more civic virtue more orientation towards dialectical synthesis
more empathy more rationality widely yes would that lead to better capacity for something like
participatory governance democracy or republic or some kind of participatory governance
or yes is it necessary for it actually yes and is it good for class interests not not really
by the way when you say class interest this is the powerful leading over the the less
powerful that kind of idea anyone that benefits from asymmetries of power doesn't necessarily
benefit from decreasing those asymmetries of power and you kind of increasing the capacity
of people more widely and um so when we talk about power we're talking about asymmetries
and agency influence and control you think that hunger for power is fundamental to human nature
I think we should get that straight before we talk about other stuff so like uh this uh
this this pickup line that I use at a bar off which is uh power crops and absolute power crops
absolutely is that true or is that just a fancy thing to say in modern society they get there's
something to be said have we changed as societies over time in terms of how much we crave power
that there is an impulse towards power that is innate in people and can be conditioned one
way or the other yes but you can see that buddhist society does a very different thing with it at
scale that you don't end up seeing the emergence of the same types of sociopathic behavior
and particularly then creating sociopathic institutions um and so it's like is eating
the foods that were rare in our evolutionary environment to give us more dopamine hit because
they were rare and they're not anymore salt fat sugar um is there something pleasurable
about those where humans have an orientation to overeat if they can well the fact that there is
that possibility doesn't mean everyone will obligately be obese and I have obesity right
like it's possible to have a particular impulse and to be able to understand it have other ones
and be able to balance them and so to say that um power dynamics are are obligate in humans and
we can't do anything about it is very similar to me to saying like we could everyone is going
to be obligately obese yeah so there's some degree to which those the control those impulses
has to do with the conditioning early in life yes and the culture that creates the environment
to be able to do that and then the recursion on that okay so what if we were to uh bear with me
just asking for a friend if we're to kill all humans on earth and then start over is their
ideas about how to build up okay we don't have to kill let's leave the humans on earth they're fine
and go to mars and start a new society is there ways to construct systems of conditioning education
of how we live with each other that would um that would incentivize us properly to not seek
power not to not construct systems that are of asymmetry of power and to create systems that
are resilient to all kinds of terrorist attacks to the all kinds of destructions i believe so
so is there some inclinings we get of course you probably don't have the all the answers but you
have insights about what that looks like i mean yeah is it just rigorous practice of
dialectic synthesis as essentially conversations with assholes of various flavors until they're
not assholes anymore because you've become a deeply empathetic with their experience
okay so there's a lot of things that we would need to construct to come back to this like
what is the basis of rivalry what how do you bind it how does it relate to tech if you have a
culture that is doing less rivalry does it always lose in war to those who do war better and how
do you make something on the enactment of how to get there from here um great great so what's
rivalry well is rivalry bad or good is so is another word for rivalry competition
yes i think roughly yes i think bad and good are kind of silly concepts here good for some
things bad for other things for resilience contexts and others even that um okay let me give you
an example that relates back to the facebook measuring thing you were mentioning a moment ago
so first i think what you're saying is actually aligned with the right direction and what i want
to get to in a moment but it's not the devil is in the details here so i i enjoy praise
it feeds my ego i grow stronger so i appreciate that i will make sure to include one piece every
15 minutes as we go thank you so it's easier to measure their problems with this argument but
there's also utility to it so let's take it for the utility it has first
it's harder to measure happiness than it is to measure comfort
uh we can measure with technology that the shocks in a car making the car bounce less
that the bed is um softer and you know material science and those types of things and happiness
is actually hard for philosophers to define because some people find that there's certain
kinds of overcoming suffering that are necessary for happiness there's happiness it feels more
like contentment and happiness it feels more like passion does is passion the source of all
suffering or the source of all creativity like the there's deep stuff and it's mostly first
person not measurable third person stuff even if maybe it corresponds to third person stuff to
some degree but we also see examples of some of our favorite examples as people who are in the
worst environments who end up finding happiness right where the third person stuff looks to be
less conducive and there's some victor frankle nelson mendela whatever um but it's pretty easy
to measure comfort it's pretty universal and i think we can see that the industrial revolution
started to replace happiness with comfort quite heavily as the thing it was optimizing for and
we can see that when increased comfort is given maybe because of the evolutionary disposition
that expending extra calories when for the majority of our history we didn't have extra
calories was not a safe thing to do who knows why um when extra comfort is given it's very
easy to take that path even if it's not the path that supports overall well being long term
and um so we can see that you know when you when you look at the techno optimist idea that we have
better lives than egyptian pharaohs and kings and whatever what they're largely looking at
is how comfortable our beds are and how comfortable the transportation systems are and things like
that in which case there's massive improvement but we also see that in some of the nations where
people have access to the most comfort suicide and mental illness are the highest and we also
see that some of the happiest cultures are actually some of the ones that are in materially
lame environments and so there's a very interesting question here and if i understand correctly you
do cold showers and joe rogan was talking about how he needs to do some fairly intensive kind of
um struggle that is a non comfort to actually induce being better as a person this concept of
hormesis that it's actually stressing an adaptive system that increases its adaptive capacity and
that there's something that the happiness of a system has something to do with its adaptive
capacity its overall resilience health well being which requires a decent bit of discomfort and yet
in the in the presence of the comfort solution it's very hard to not choose it and then as you're
choosing it regularly to actually down regulate your overall adaptive capacity and so when we
start saying can we make tech where we're measuring for the things that it produces beyond just the
measure of gdp or whatever particular measures look like the revenue generation or profit generation
of my business are all the meaningful things measurable and what are the right measures
and what are the externalities of optimizing for that measurement set what meaningful things
aren't included in that measurement set that might have their own externalities these are
some of the questions we actually have to take seriously yeah and we i think they're answerable
questions right progressively better not perfect right so like so first of all let me throw out
happiness and comfort out of the discussion those seem like useless the distinction so i
because i said they're useful well being is useful but i think i take it back
i'm i knew i proposed new metrics in this brainstorm session which is so one is like
personal growth which is intellectual growth i think we're able to make that concrete
for ourselves like you're a better person than you were a week ago or a worse person than you
were a week ago i think we can ourselves report that and and and understand what that means it's
this gray area and we try to define it but i think we humans are pretty good at that because we
have a sense an idealistic sense of the person we might be able to become we we all dream of
becoming a certain kind of person and i think we have a sense of getting closer and not towards
that person maybe this is not a great metric fine the other one is love actually
fuck if you're happy or not or you're comfortable or not how much love do you have towards your
fellow human beings i feel like if you try to optimize that and increasing that that's going to have
that's a good metric how many times a day sorry if i can make quantify how many times a day have you
thought positively of another human being just put that down as a number and increase that number
i think the process of saying okay so let's not take gdp or gdp per capita is the metric we
want to optimize for because gdp goes up during war and it goes up with more health care spending
from sicker people and various things that we wouldn't say correlate to quality of life
addiction drives gdp awesomely um by the way when i said growth i wasn't referring to gdp
i know i'm giving an example now of the primary metric we use and why it's not an adequate metric
and because we're exploring other ones so the idea of saying what would the metrics for a
good civilization be if i had to pick a set of metrics what would the best ones be if i was going
to optimize for those and then really try to run the thought experiment more deeply and say okay so
what happens if we optimize for that try to think through the first and second and third order effects
of what happens it's positive and then also say what negative things can happen from optimizing
that what actually matters that is not included in that or in that way of defining it because love
versus number of positive thoughts per day i could just make a long list of names and just
say positive thing about each one it's all very superficial not include animals with the rest of
life have a have a very shallow total amount of it but i'm optimizing the number and if i get some
credit for the number so the and this is when i said the model of reality isn't reality when you
make a set of metrics they were going to optimize for this whatever reality is that is not included
in those metrics can be the areas where harm occurs which is why i would say that wisdom is something
like the discernment that leads to right choices beyond what metrics based optimization would offer
yeah but another way to say that is wisdom is constantly expanding an evolving set of metrics
which means that there is something in you that is recognizing a new metric that's important that
isn't part of that metric set so there's a certain kind of connection discernment awareness
and this is an iterative game theory there's a girdles in completeness there right which is if
the system if the set of things is consistent it won't be complete so we're going to keep adding
to it which is why we were saying earlier i don't think it's not beautiful and especially if you
were just saying one of the metrics you want to optimize for at the individual level is becoming
right that we're becoming more well that's then becomes true for the civilization and our metrics
sets as well yeah and our definition of how to think about a meaningful life and a meaningful
civilization i can tell you what some of my favorite metrics are what's that
well love is obviously not a metric it's like you can bench yeah it's a good metric yeah i want
to optimize that across the entire population starting with infants um so in the same way that
love isn't a metric but you could make metrics that look at certain parts of it the thing i'm
about to say isn't a metric but it's a it's a consideration because i thought about this a lot
i don't think there is a metric a right one um i think that every metric by itself without this
thing we talked about of the continuous improvement becomes a paperclip maximizer i think that's why
why what the idea of false idol means in terms of the model of reality not being reality then
my sacred relationship is to reality itself which also binds me to the unknown forever
to the known but also to the unknown and there's a sense of sacredness connected to the unknown
that creates an epistemic humility that is always seeking not just to optimize the thing i know
but to learn new stuff and to be open to perceive reality directly so my model never becomes sacred
my model is useful my so the model can't be the false idol correct yeah and this is why the first
verse of the Tao Te Ching is the Tao that is nameable is not the eternal Tao the naming then
can become the source of the 10 000 things that if you get too carried away with it can actually
obscure you from paying attention to reality beyond in the models it sounds a lot a lot like
Steven Wolfram but in a different language much more poetic i can't imagine that no i'm referring
i'm joking but there's echoes of cellular phenomena which you can't name you can't construct a good
model cellular phenomena you can only watch in awe i apologize i'm distracting your train of thought
horribly and miserably making a difference by the way something robots aren't good at
and uh dealing with the uncertainty of uneven ground you've been okay so far you've been doing
wonderfully so what's your favorite metrics okay so i know you're not so i have a fascinating
so one metric and there are problems with this but one metric that i like to just as a thought
experiment to consider is because you're actually asking where i mean i know you ask your guests
about the meaning of life because ultimately when you're deciding when you're saying what is a
desirable civilization you can't answer that without answering what is a meaningful human life and
to say what is a good civilization because it's going to be in relationship to that
right um and then you have whatever your answer is how do you know what is the what is the
epistemic basis for for postulating that there's also a whole nother reason for asking that question
i don't i mean that doesn't even apply to you whatsoever which is it's interesting how few
people have been asked questions like it we we we joke about these questions is silly right
it's it's funny to watch a person and if i was more of an asshole i would really stick on that
question right it's a silly question in some sense but like we haven't really considered
what it means just a more concrete version of that question is what is what is a better world
what is the kind of world we're trying to create really i think have you really thought okay i'll
give you some kind of simple answers to that that are meaningful to me but let me do the societal
indices first because they're fun yes we should take a note of this meaningful thing because it's
important to come back to um are you reminding me to ask you about the meaning of life noted
let me jot that down yeah so um well because i think i stopped tracking it like 25 open threads
okay let her all burn one index that i find very interesting is the inverse correlation of
addiction within the society the more a society produces addiction within the people in it the
less healthy i think the society is as a pretty fundamental metric and so the more the individuals
feel that there are less compulsive things in compelling them to behave in ways that are destructive
to their own values and insofar as a civilization is conditioning and influencing the individuals
within it the inverse of addiction broadly defined correct addiction what's yeah compulsive behavior
that is destructive towards things that we value yeah i think that's a very interesting one to
think about that's a really interesting one yeah and this is then also where comfort and
addiction start to get very close and the ability to go in the other direction from addiction is
the ability to be exposed to hypernormal stimuli and not go down the path of desensitizing to other
stimuli and needing that hypernormal stimuli which does involve a kind of hormesis so i do think
the civilization of the future has to create something like ritualized discomfort and um
um ritualized discomfort yeah i think that's what the sweat lodge and the vision quest
and the solo journey and the ayahuasca journey and the sundance were i think it's even a big
part of what yoga asana was um is to make beings that are resilient and strong they have to overcome
some things to make beings that can control their own mind and fear they have to face some fears
but we don't want to put everybody in war or real trauma and yet we can see that
the most fucked up people we know had childhoods of a lot of trauma but some of the most incredible
people we know had childhoods of a lot of trauma whether or not they happen to make it through
and overcome that or not so how do we get the benefits of the stealing of character and the
resilience and the whatever that happened from the difficulty without traumatizing people
a certain kind of ritualized discomfort that not only has us overcome something by ourselves
but overcome it together with each other where nobody bails when it gets hard because the other
people are there so it's both a resilience of the individuals and a resilience of the bonding
so i think we'll keep getting more and more comfortable stuff but we have to also
develop resilience in the presence of that um for the anti addiction direction and the fullness
of character um and the trustworthiness to others so you have to be uh consistently
injecting discomfort into the system ritualize i mean this sounds like uh you have to imagine
sycophas happy you have to uh imagine sycophas with his rock optimally resilient from a metrics
perspective in society so we want we want to constantly be throwing rocks at ourselves
not constantly uh you didn't have to frequently um periodically yes and there's different levels
of intensity different period of disease now i do not think this should be imposed by states
i think it should emerge from cultures and i think the cultures are developing people that
understand the value of it so the people so there is both a cultural cohesion to it but
there's also a voluntarism because the people value the thing that is being developed to understand
it and that's what condition so it's conditioning it's conditioning some of these um some of these
values and conditioning is a bad word because we like our idea of sovereignty but when we recognize
the language that we speak and the words that we think in and the patterns of thought built
into that language and the aesthetics that we like and so much is conditioned in us just
based on where we're born you can't not condition people so all you can do is take more responsibility
for what the conditioning factors are and then you have to think about this question of what is
a meaningful human life because we're unlike the other animals born into environment that they're
genetically adapted for we're building new environments that we were not adapted for and
then we're becoming affected by those so then we have to say well what kinds of environments
digital environments physical environments social environments would we want to create that would
develop the healthiest happiest most moral noble meaningful people and what are even those
sets of things that matter so you end up getting deep existential consideration at the heart of
civilization design when you start to rise how powerful we're becoming and how much
what we're building it in service towards matters before I pull it I think three threads you just
lay down is there another metric index say you're interested I'll tell you one more that I really
like there's a there's a number but the one then the next one that comes to mind is
I have to make a very quick model
healthy human bonding say we were in a tribal type setting my positive emotional states and your
positive emotional states would most of the time be correlated your negative emotional
states in mind and so you start laughing I start laughing you start crying my eyes might tear up
and we would call that the compassion compersion axis I would this is a model I find useful so
compassion is when you're feeling something negative I feel some pain I feel some empathy
something in relationship compersion is when you do well I'm stoked for you right like I actually
feel happiness right down I like compersion yeah the fact that it's such an uncommon word in English
is actually a problem culturally because I feel that often and I think that's a really good feeling
to feel and maximize for actually that's actually the metric I'm gonna say oh is the compassion
compersion at axis is the thing I would optimize for now there is a state where my emotional states
and your emotional states are just totally decoupled and that is like sociopathy I don't want
to hurt you but I don't care if I do or for you to do well or whatever but there's a worst state
and it's extremely common which is where they're inversely coupled where my positive emotions
correspond to your negative ones and vice versa and that is the I would call it the jealousy
sadism axis the jealousy axis is when you're doing really well I feel something bad I feel
taken away from less than upset envious whatever and that's so common but I think of it as kind of a
low grade psychopathology that we've just normalized the idea that I'm actually upset at the happiness
or fulfillment or success of another is like a profoundly fucked up thing no we shouldn't
shame it and repress it so it gets worse we should study it where does it come from and it
comes from our own insecurities and stuff and but then the next part that everybody knows is
really fucked up is just on the same axis it's the same inverted which is to the jealousy or the
envy is the I feel badly when you're doing well the sadism side is I actually feel good when you
lose or when you're in pain I feel some happiness that's associated and you can see when someone
feels jealous sometimes they feel jealous with a partner and then they feel they want that partner
to get it revenge comes up or something so sadism is really like jealousy is one step on the path
to sadism from the healthy compassion conversion axis so I would like to see a society that is
inversely that is conditioning sadism and jealousy inversely right the lower that amount and the more
the compassion conversion and if I had to summarize that very simply I'd say it would optimize for
conversion which is because notice that's not just saying love for you where I might be self
sacrificing and miserable and I love people but I kill myself which I don't think anybody thinks
great idea or happiness where I might be sociopathically happy where I'm causing problems all over
the place or even sadistically happy but it's a coupling right that I'm actually feeling happiness
in relationship to yours and even in causal relationship where I my own agentic desire to
get happier wants to support you too that's actually speaking of another pickup line
that's quite honestly what I this is a guy who's single this is going to come out very ridiculous
because it's like oh yeah where's your girlfriend bro but that's what I look for in a relationship
because it's like it's so much it's so it's such an amazing life where you actually get joy from
another person's success and they get joy from your success and then it becomes like you don't
actually need to succeed much for that to have a like a a loop like a cycle of just like happiness
that just increases like exponentially it's weird so like just be just enjoying the the happiness
of others this success of others so this this is like the let's call this because the first
person that drilled this into my head is Rogan Joe Rogan he was the embodiment of that because I saw
somebody who is successful rich and nonstop true I mean you could tell when somebody's full of
shit and somebody's not really genuinely enjoying the success of his friends that that was weird to
me that was interesting and I mean the way you're kind of speaking to it the reason Joe stood out
to me is I guess I haven't witnessed genuine expression of that often in this culture I've
just real joy for others I mean part of that has to do there hasn't been many channels where you can
watch or listen to people being their authentic selves so I'm sure there's a bunch of people
who live life with compulsion they probably don't seek public attention also but the
that that was yeah if there was any word that could express what what I've learned from Joe
why he's been a really inspiring figure is that compulsion and I wish our world was had a lot more
of that because then I mean my own sorry to go in a small tangent but like you're speaking how
society should function but I feel like if you optimize for that metric in your own personal life
you're going to live a truly fulfilling life I don't know what the great word to use but that's
a really good way to live life you will also learn what gets in the way of it right and how to work
with it that if you wanted to help try to build systems at scale or apply Facebook or exponential
technologies to do that you would have more actual depth of real knowledge of what that takes and
this is you know as you mentioned that there's this virtuous cycle between when you get stoked on
other people doing well and then they have a similar relationship to you and everyone is in
the process of building each other up and this is what I would say the healthy version of competition
is versus the unhealthy version the healthy version right the the root I believe it's a lot
and word that means to strive together and it's that impulse of becoming where I want to become
more but I recognize that there's actually a hormesis there's a challenge that is needed
for me to be able to do that but that means that yes there's an impulse where I'm trying to get
ahead maybe I'm even trying to win but I actually want a good opponent and I want them to get ahead
too because that is where my ongoing becoming happens and the win itself will get boring very
quickly the ongoing becoming is where there's a liveness and for the ongoing becoming they need
to have it too and that's the strive together that so in the healthy competition I'm stoked when
they're doing really well because my becoming is supported by it now this is actually a very nice
segue into a model I like about what a meaningful human life is if you want to go there let's go
there what I have I have three things I'm going elsewhere with but if we were first let us take
this short stroll through the park of the meaning of life Daniel what is a meaningful life?
I think the semantics end up mattering because a lot of people will take the word meaning and the
word purpose almost interchangeably and they'll think kind of what is the meaning of my life
what is the meaning of human life what is the meaning of life what's the meaning of the universe
and what is the meaning of existence rather than non existence so there's a lot of kind
of existential considerations there and I think there's some cognitive mistakes that are very easy
like taking the idea of purpose which is like a goal which is a utilitarian concept the purpose
of one thing is defined in relationship to other things that have assumed value
and to say what is the purpose of everything well it's a purpose is too small of a question
it's fundamentally a relative question within everything what is the purpose of one thing
relative to another what is the purpose of everything and there's nothing outside of it
with which to say it you actually just got to the limits of the utility of the concept of purpose
it doesn't mean it's purposeless in the sense of something inside of it being purposeless it
means the concept is too small which is why you end up getting to you know like in Taoism talking
about the nature of it rather the there's a fundamental what where the why can't go deeper
is the nature of it but I'm gonna try to speak to a much simpler part which is when people
think about what is a meaningful human life and kind of if we were to optimize for something at
the level of individual life but also how does optimizing for this at the level of the individual
life lead to the best society for insofar as people living that way affects others and long
term the world as a whole and how would we then make a civilization that was trying to think
about these things because you can see that there are a lot of dialectics where there's value on
two sides individualism and collectivism or the ability to accept things and the ability to push
harder and whatever and there's failure modes on both sides and so when you were starting to say
okay individual happiness you're like wait fuck say this can be happy while hurting people it's
not individual happiness it's love but wait some people can self sacrifice out of love in a way
that actually ends up just creating codependency for everybody or okay so so how do we think about
all those things together one like this kind of came to me as a simple way that I kind of relate
to it is that a meaningful life involves the mode of being the mode of doing and the mode of
becoming and it involves a virtuous relationship between those three and that any of those modes
on their own also have failure modes that are not a meaningful life the mode of being the way I
would describe it if if we're talking about the essence of it is about taking in and appreciating
the beauty of life that is now to mode that is in the moment and that is largely about being with
what is it's fundamentally grounded in the nature of experience and the meaningfulness of experience
the prima facia meaningfulness of when I'm having this experience I'm not actually asking what the
meaning of life is I'm actually full of it I'm full of experiencing it the momentary experience
yes so taking in the beauty of life doing is adding to the beauty of life I'm going to produce
some art I'm going to produce some technology that will make life easier more beautiful for
somebody else I'm going to do some science that will end up leading to better insights or others
people's ability to appreciate the beauty of life more because they understand more about it or
whatever it is or protect it right I'm going to protect it in some way but that's adding to
or being in service of the beauty of life through our doing and becoming is getting better at both
of those being able to deepen our being which is to be able to take in the beauty of life more
profoundly be more moved by it touched by it and increasing our capacity with doing to add to the
beauty of life more and so I hold that a meaningful life has to be all three of those and where
they're not in conflict with each other ultimately it grounds in being it grounds in the intrinsic
meaningfulness of experience and then my doing is ultimately something that will be able to
increase the possibility of the quality of experience for others and my becoming is a
deepening on those so it grounds an experience and also the evolutionary possibility of experience
and the point is to oscillate between these never getting stuck on anyone
yeah or I suppose in parallel well you can't really attention as a thing you can only allocate
attention I want moments where I am absorbed in the sunset and I'm not thinking about what to do
next yeah and then the fullness of that can make it to where my doing doesn't come from what's in
it for me because I actually feel overwhelmingly full already and then it's like how can I how
can I make life better for other people that don't have as much opportunities I had how can I add
something wonderful how can I just be in the creative process and so I think where the doing
comes from matters and if the doing comes from a fullness of being it's inherently going to be
paying attention to externalities or it's more oriented to do that than if it comes from some
emptiness that is trying to get full in some way that is willing to cause sacrifices other places
and where a chunk of its attention is internally focused and so when Buddha said desires the cause
of all suffering then later the vow of the bodhisattva which was to show up for all sentient beings
in universe forever is a pretty intense thing like desire I would say there's a kind of desire
if we think of desire as a basis for movement like a flow or a gradient there's a kind of desire
that comes from something missing inside seeking fulfillment of that in the world that ends up
being the cause of actions that perpetuate suffering but there's also not just non desire
there's a kind of desire that comes from feeling full at the beauty of life and wanting to add to
it that is a flow this direction and I don't think that is the cause of suffering I think that is
you know and the western traditions right the eastern traditions focused on that
and kind of unconditional happiness outside of them in the moment outside of time western
traditions said no actually desires the source of creativity and we're here to be made in the image
and likeness of the creator we're here to be fundamentally creative but creating from where
and in service of what creating from a sense of connection to everything and wholeness in
service of the well being of all of it is very different which is back to that compassion
compersion axis being doing becoming it's pretty powerful also could potentially be
algorithmatized into a robot just saying where does where does death come into that
being is forgetting I mean the the concept of time completely there's a there's a sense to
doing and becoming that has a deadline and built in the urgency built in do you think
death is fundamental to this to a meaningful life
acknowledging or
feeling the terror of death like Ernest Becker or just acknowledging the uncertainty the mystery the
the melancholy nature of the fact that the right ends is that part of this equation
or though unnecessary okay look at how it could be related I've experienced fear of death
I've also experienced
times where I thought I was gonna die it felt extremely peaceful and beautiful and
it's funny because if we we can be afraid of death because we're afraid of hell or
battery incarnation or the bardo or some kind of idea of the afterlife we have where we're
projecting some kind of sentient suffering but if we're afraid of just non experience
I notice that every time I stay up late enough that I'm really tired I'm longing for deep
deep sleep and non experience right like I'm actually longing for experience to stop
and it's not morbid it's not a bummer it's and and I don't mind falling asleep and I sometimes
when I wake up want to go back into it and then when it's done I'm happy to come out of it so
when we think about death and having finite time here and we could talk about
if we live for a thousand years instead of a hundred or something like that it'll still be
finite time the one bummer with the age we die is that I generally find that people mostly start
to emotionally mature just shortly before they die but there's
if I get to live forever I I can just stay focused on what's in it for me forever
and if life continues and consciousness and sentience and people appreciating beauty and
adding to it and becoming continues my life doesn't but my life can have effects that continue
well beyond it then life with a capital L starts mattering more to me than my life my life gets
to be a part of it and in service to and the whole thing about when old men plant trees the
shade of which they'll never get to be in I remember the first time I read this poem by
Hafez the Sufi poet written in like 13th century or something like that and he talked about
that if you're lonely to think about him and he was kind of leaning his spirit
into yours across the distance of a millennium and would come for you with these poems and
just thinking about people millennium from now and caring about their experience and what they'd
be suffering if they'd be lonely and could he offer something that could touch them
and it's just fucking beautiful and so like the most beautiful parts of humans have to do with
something that transcends what's in it for me and death forces you to that so not not only
does death create the urgency it urgency of doing it you're very right it does have a sense
in which it incentivizes the compersion and the compassion and the widening you remember
Einstein had that quote something to the effect of it's an optical delusion of consciousness to
believe there are separate things there's this one thing we call universe and something about us
being inside of a prison of perception that can only you know see a very narrow little bit of it
but this this might be just some weird disposition of mine but when I think about the future after
I'm dead and I think about consciousness I think about young people falling in love for the first
time in their their experience and I think about people being awed by sunsets and I think about
all of it right I can't not feel connected to that do you feel some sadness to the very high
likelihood that you'll be forgotten completely by all of human history you Daniel the name
that that which cannot be named systems like to self perpetuate
egos do that the idea that I might do something meaningful that future people appreciate of
course there's like a certain sweetness to that idea but I know how many people did something
did things that I wouldn't be here without and that my life would be less without whose names
I will never know and I feel a gratitude to them I feel a closeness I feel touched by that and I
think to the degree that the future people are conscious enough there is a you know a lot of
traditions had this kind of are we being good ancestors and respect for the ancestors beyond
the names I think that's a very healthy idea but let me return to a much less beautiful
and much less pleasant conversation you mentioned prison back to x risk okay
okay and conditioning you mentioned something about the state
so what role let's talk about companies governments parents all the mechanisms that
can be a source of conditioning which flavor of ice cream do you like do you think the state
is the right thing for the future so governments that are elected democratic systems
that are representing representative democracy is there some kind of political system
of governance that you find appealing is it parents
meaning a very close knit tribes of conditioning that's the most essential and then you and Michael
malice would happily agree that it's anarchy where the state should be dissolved or destroyed or
burned to the ground if you're Michael malice giggling holding the torch as the fire burns
so which which is it is the state can the state be good or is the state bad for the condition of a
beautiful world a or b this is like an s you like you like to give these a simplified good or bad
things would i like the state that we live in currently the united states federal government
to stop existing today no i would really not like that i think that'd be not quite bad for
the world in a lot of ways do i think that it's a optimal social system and maximally
just and humane and all those things and i wanted to continue as is no also not that but i am much
more interested in it being able to evolve to a better thing without going through the catastrophe
phase that i think it's just non existence would give so what size of state is good in a sense like
do we should we as a human society as this world becomes more globalized should we be constantly
striving to reduce the we can we can put on a map like right now literally like the the the centers
of power in the world some of them are tech companies some of them are governments should
we be trying to as much as possible decentralize the power to where it's very difficult to point
on the map the centers of power and that means making a state however there's a bunch of different
ways to make the government much smaller that could be reducing in the united states reducing the
the funding for the government all those kinds of things there's a set of responsibilities
the the set of powers it could be i mean this is far out but making more nations
or maybe nations not in a space that are defined by geographic location but rather in the space
of ideas which is what anarchy is about so anarchy is about forming collectives based on their set
of ideas and and doing so dynamically not based on where you were born and so on i think we can
say that the natural state of humans if we want to describe such a thing was to live in tribes
that were below the dunbar number meaning that for a few hundred thousand years of human history
all of the groups of humans mostly stayed under that size and whenever we'd get up to that size
it would end up cleaving and so it seems like there's a pretty strong but there weren't individual
humans out in the wild doing really well right so we were a group animal but with groups that had
a specific size so we could say in a way humans were being domesticated by those groups they were
learning how to have certain rules to participate with the group without which you'd get kicked out
but that that's still the wild state of people and and maybe it's useful to do as a side statement
which i've recently looked at a bunch of papers around Dunbar's number where the mean is actually
150 if you actually look at the original papers it's a range it's really a range so it's actually
some somewhere under a thousand so it's a range of like two to five hundred or whatever it is
but like you could argue that the uh i think it actually is exactly two the range is two to five
hundred and twenty something like that and this is the mean that's taken crudely it's not a very
good paper the in terms of the actual numerical numerically speaking but it'd be interesting
if there's a bunch of Dunbar numbers that could be computed for particular environments particular
conditions so on it is very true that they're likely to be something small you know under a
million but it'd be interesting if we can expand that number in interesting ways that will change
the fabric of this conversation i just want to kind of throw that in there i don't know the
if the 150 is baked in some hauling the heart into the hardware we can talk about some of the
things that it probably has to do with up to a certain number of people and this is going to
be variable based on the social technologies that mediate it to some degree we can talk about that
in a minute um up to a certain number of people everybody can know everybody else
pretty intimately so let's go ahead and just take 150 as a as an average number
everybody can know everyone intimately enough that if your actions made anyone else do poorly
it's your extended family and you're stuck living with them and you know who they are and there's
no anonymous people there's no just them and over there and that's one part of what leads to a
kind of tribal process where it's good for the individual and good for the whole has a coupling
also below that scale everyone is somewhat aware of what everybody else is doing there's not
groups that are very siloed and as a result it's actually very hard to get away with bad behavior
there's a forced kind of transparency and so you don't need kind of like the state in in that way
but lying to people doesn't actually get you ahead sociopathic behavior doesn't get you ahead
because it gets seen and so there's a conditioning environment where the individual's behaving in
a way that is aligned with the interest of the tribe is what gets conditioned when it gets to be
a much larger system it becomes easier to hide certain things from the group as a whole as well
as to be less emotionally bound to a bunch of anonymous people i would say there's also a communication
protocol where up to about that number of people we could all sit around a tribal council and be
part of a conversation around a really big decision do we migrate do we not migrate do we you know
some something like that do we get rid of this person and why why would i want to agree to be
a part of a larger group where everyone can't be part of that council and so i am going to now be
subject to law that i have no say in if i could be part of a smaller group that could still survive
and i get a say in the law that i'm subject to so i think the cleaving and in a way we can look at it
beyond the Dunbar number two is we can look at that a civilization has binding energy
that is holding them together and has cleaving energy and if the binding energy exceeds the
cleaving energy that civilization will last and so there are things that we can do to decrease
the cleaving energy within the society things we can do to increase the binding energy i think
naturally we saw that had certain characteristics up to a certain size kind of tribalism that ended
with a few things it ended with people having migrated enough that when you started to get resource
wars you couldn't just migrate away easily and so tribal warfare became more obligated it involved
the plow in the beginning of real economic surplus there were so there were a few different kind of
forcing functions but we're talking about what size should it be right what size should a society
be and i think the idea like if we think about your body for a moment as a self organizing
complex system that is multi scaled we think about body is a wonderland our body is a wonderland
yeah uh you have that's a john mayer song i apologize but yes so uh if we think about our
our body and the billions of cells that are in it well you don't have like think about how ridiculous
it would be to try to have all the tens of trillions of cells in it with no internal
organization structure right just like a sea of protoplasm it wouldn't work your democracy and so
you have cells and tissues and then you have tissues and organs and organs and organ systems
and so you have these layers of organization and then obviously the individual in a tribe in a
ecosystem and each of the higher layers are both based on the lower layers but also influencing them
yeah i think the future of civilization will be similar which is there's a level of governance
that happens at the level of the individual my own governance of my own choice i think there's
a level that happens at the level of a family we're making decisions together we're inter influencing
each other and affecting each other taking responsibility for the idea of an extended
family and you can see that like for a lot of human history we had an extended family we had a local
community a local church or whatever it was we had these intermediate structures whereas right
now there's kind of like the individual producer consumer taxpayer voter and the massive nation
state global complex and not that much in the way of intermediate structures that we relate with
and not that much in the way of real personal dynamics all impersonalized made fungible and
so i think that we have to have global governance meaning i think we have to have governance at
the scale we affect stuff and if if anybody is messing up the oceans that matters for everybody
so that that can't only be national or only local everyone is scared of the idea of global
governance because we think about some top down system of imposition that now has no checks and
balances on power i'm scared of that same version so i'm not talking about that kind of global
governance it's why i'm even using the word governance as a process rather than government
as an imposed phenomena and so i think we have to have global governance but i think we also have
to have local governance and there has to be relationships between them that each where there
are both checks and balances and power flows of information so i think governance at the level
of cities will be a bigger deal in the future than governance at the level of nation states because
i think nation states are largely fictitious things that are defined by wars and agreements to
stop wars and like that i think cities are based on real things that will keep being real
where the proximity of certain things together the physical proximity of things together gives
increased value of those things so you look at like jeffrey west's work on scale and finding that
companies and nation states and things that have a kind of complicated agreement structure get
diminishing return of production per capita as the total number of people increases beyond
about the tribal scale but the city actually gets increasing productivity per capita but it's not
designed it's kind of this organic thing right so there should be governance at the level of
cities because people can sense and actually have some agency there probably neighborhoods and smaller
scales within it and also verticals and some of it won't be geographic it'll be network based
right networks of affinities so i don't think the future is one type of governance now what we can say
more broadly is say when we're talking about groups of people that interaffect each other the idea of
a civilization is that we can figure out how to coordinate our choice making to not be at war with
each other and hopefully increase total productive capacity anyway that's good for everybody division
of labor and specialties so we all get more better stuff and whatever but it's a it's a
coordination of our choice making i think we can look at civilizations failing on the side of not
having enough coordination of choice making so they fail on the side of chaos and then they
cleave and an internal war comes about or whatever or they can't make smart decisions and they over
use their resources or whatever or it can fail on the side of trying to get order via imposition
via force and so it fails on the side of oppression which ends up being for a while functional ish
for the thing as a whole but miserable for most people in it until it fails either because of
revolt or because it can't innovate enough or something like that and so there's this like
toggling between order via oppression and chaos and i think the idea of democracy not the way
we've implemented it but the idea of it whether we're talking about a representative democracy or a
direct digital democracy liquid democracy republic or whatever the idea of an open society participatory
governance is can we have order that is emergent rather than imposed so that we aren't stuck with
chaos and infighting and inability to coordinate and we're also not stuck with oppression and
what would it take to have emergent order this is the most kind of central question for me these
days because if we look at what different nation states are doing around the world
and we see nation states that are more authoritarian that in some ways are actually
coordinating much more effectively so for instance we can see that china has built high speed rail
not just through its country but around the world and the u.s hasn't built any high speed rail yet
you can see that it brought 300 million people out of poverty in a time where we've had increasing
economic inequality happening you can see like that if there was a single country that could make
all of its own stuff if the global supply chains failed china would be the closest one to being able
to start to go closed loop on fundamental things uh belt and road initiative supply chain on rare
earth metals transistor manufacturing that is like oh they're actually coordinating more effectively
in some important ways in the last call it 30 years and that's imposed order imposed order
and we can see that if in the u.s if let's look at why real quick
we know why we created term limits so that we wouldn't have forever monarchs that's the thing
we were trying to get away from and that there would be checks and balances on power and that
kind of thing but that also has created a negative second order effect which is nobody
does long term planning because somebody comes in who's got four years they want reelected
they don't do anything that doesn't create a return within four years that will end up getting them
elected reelected and so the 30 year industrial development to build high speed trains or the
new kind of fusion energy or whatever it is just doesn't get invested in and then if you have left
versus right where whatever someone does for four years then the other guy gets in and undoes it for
four years and most of the energy goes into campaigning against each other this system is
just dissipating as heat right like it's just burning up as heat and the system that has no
term limits and no internal friction in fighting because they got rid of those people can actually
coordinate better but uh i would argue it has its own fail states eventually and dystopic properties
that are not the thing we want there so the goals to accomplish to create a system that
does the long term planning without the negative effects of a monarch or dictator that stays there
for the long term and uh accomplish that through uh not through the imposition of a single leader
but through emergent so that doesn't that perhaps first of all the technology in itself seems to
maybe maybe you disagree allow for different possibilities here which is make primary the
system not the humans so the the the basic the medium on which the democracy happens like
like a platform or where people can make decisions do the choice making the coordination of the
choice making where emerges some kind of order to where like something that applies at the
scale of the family the extended family the city the the country the the continent the whole world
and then does that so dynamically constantly changing based on the needs of the people
sort of always evolving and it would all be owned by google like doesn't that doesn't this
is there a way to um so first of all you're optimistic that it you could basically create
that technology can save us technology at creating platforms by technology i mean like software
and network platforms that allows humans to deliberate like make government together dynamically
without the need for a leader that's on a podium screaming stuff that's one and two if you're
optimistic about that are you also optimistic about the ceo's of such platforms the idea that
technology is values neutral values agnostic it and people can use it for construct over
destructive purposes but it doesn't predispose anything it's just it's just silly and naive
technology elicits patterns of human behavior because those who utilize it and get ahead
end up behaving differently because of their utilization of it and then other people
then they end up shaping the world or other people race to also get the power of the technology
and so there's whole schools of anthropology that look at the effect on social systems and the minds
of people of the change in our tooling uh marvin harris's work called cultural materialism looked
at this deeply obviously uh marcia mcluen looked specifically at the way that information technologies
change the nature of our beliefs minds values social systems um i will not try to do this
rigorously because there are academics will disagree on the subtle details but i'll do it
kind of like illustratively you think about the emergence of the plow the ox drawn plow in the
beginning of agriculture that came with it where before that you had hunter gather and then you had
horticulture kind of a digging stick but not the plow well that the world changed a lot with that
right and and a few of the changes that um at least some theorists believe in is when the
ox drawn plow started to proliferate any culture that utilized it was able to start to actually
cultivate grain because just with a digging stick you couldn't get enough grain for it to matter
grain was a storable caloric surplus they could make it through the famines they could grow their
populations so the ones that used it got so much ahead that it became obligate and everybody
used it that corresponding with the use of a plow animism went away everywhere that it existed
because you can't talk about the spirit of the buffalo while beating the cow all day long to
pull a plow um so the moment that we do animal husbandry of that kind we have to beat the cow
all day you have to say it's just a dumb animal man has dominion over earth and the nature of
even our religious and spiritual ideas change you went from women primarily using the digging stick
to do the horticulture or gathering before that men doing the hunting stuff to now men had to
use the plow because the upper body strength actually really mattered women would have miscarriages
when they would do it when they were pregnant so all the caloric supply started to come from men
where it had been from both before and the ratio of male female gods changed to being mostly male
gods following that um obviously we went from very that particular line of thought then also
says that feminism followed the tractor and that the rise of feminism um in the west started to
follow women being able to say we can do what men can because the male upper body strength wasn't
differential once the internal combustion engine was much stronger um and we can drive a tractor
so I don't think to try to trace complex things to one cause is a good idea so I think this is a
reductionist view but it has truth in it and so the idea that technology is values agnostic
is silly technology codes patterns of behavior that code rationalizing those patterns of behavior
and believing in them the the plow also is the beginning of the Anthropocene right it was the
beginning of us changing the environment radically to to clear cut areas to just make them useful
for people which also meant the change of the view of where the the web of life we're just a part
of it etc so all those types of things um so that's brilliantly put but by the way that was just
brilliant but the question is so it's not agnostic but so we have to look at what the
psychological effects of specific tech applied certain ways are and be able to say it's not just
doing the first order thing you intended it's doing like the effect on patriarchy and animism
and um the end of tribal culture in the beginning of empire and the class systems that came with
that not like we can go on and on about what the plow did um the beginning of surplus was
inheritance which then became the capital model and like lots of things so we have to say when
we're looking at the tech how is what are the values built into the way the tech is being built
that are not obvious right so you always have to consider externalities yes and the externalities
are not just physical to the environment they're also to how the people are being conditioned
and how the relationality between them is being conditioned question i'm asking you so i personally
would rather be led by a plow and a tractor than stalling okay that's the question i'm asking you
is uh in creating an emergent government where people where there's a democracy that's dynamic
that makes choices that does governance at at like a very kind of liquid like uh there's a bunch of
fine resolution layers of abstraction of governance happening at all scales right and doing so
dynamically where no one person has power at any one time that can dominate and impose rule okay
that's the stalling version i'm saying isn't there the uh the isn't the alternative that's emergent
empowered or made possible by the plow and the tractor which is the modern version of that is
like the internet the the digital space where we can the monetary system where you have the
current currency and so on but you have much more importantly to me at least it's just basic
social interaction the mechanisms of human transacting with each other in the space of ideas
isn't so yes it's not agnostic definitely not agnostic you've had a brilliant rant there the
tractor has effects but isn't that the way we achieve an emergent system of governance yes but
i wouldn't say we're on track you haven't seen anything promising it's not that i haven't seen
anything promising is that to be on track requires understanding and guiding some of the things
differently than is currently happening and it's possible that's actually what i really care about
so you couldn't have had a stall in without having certain technologies emerge he couldn't
have ruled such a big area without transportation technologies without the the train without the
communication tech that made it possible so when you say you'd rather have a tractor or a plow
than a stall and there's a relationship between them that is more recursive which is new physical
technologies allow rulers to rule with more power over larger distances historically and
but some things are more responsible for that than others like stalling also eats
stuff for breakfast but the thing he ate for breakfast is less responsible for the starvation
of millions than than the train the train is more responsible for that and then the weapons
of war are more responsible so some technology like let's not throw it all in the you're saying
like technology has a responsibility here but some is better than others i'm saying that people's
use of technology will change their behavior so it has behavioral dispositions built in
the change of the behavior will also change the values in the society it's very complicated right
it will also as a result both make people who have different kinds of predispositions with
regard to rulership and different kinds of new capacities and so we have to think about these
things it's kind of well understood that the printing press and then in early industrialism
ended feudalism and created kind of nation states so one thing i would say as a long trend
that we can look at is that whenever there is a step function a major leap in technology physical
technology the the underlying techno industrial base with which we do stuff it ends up coding for
it ends up predisposing a whole bunch of human behavioral patterns that the previous social
system what had not emerged to try to solve and so it usually ends up breaking the previous
social systems the way the plow broke the tribal system the way that the industrial revolution
broke the feudal system and then new social systems have to emerge that can deal with that
the new powers the new dispositions whatever with that tech obviously the nuke broke nation state
governance being adequate and said we can't ever have that again so then it created this
international governance apparatus world so i guess what i'm saying is that
it the solution is not exponential tech following the current path of what the market incentivizes
exponential tech to do market being a previous social tech i would say that exponential tech
if we look at different types of social tech so let's just briefly look at
that democracy tried to do the emergent order thing right at least that's the story
and which is and this is why if you look at this important part to build first it's kind
of doing it it's just doing it poorly you're saying i mean that's it is emergent order in
some sense i mean that's the hope of democracy versus other forms of government correct i mean
i i said at least the story because obviously it didn't do it for women and slaves early on it
doesn't do it for all classes equally etc but the the idea of democracy is that is participatory
governance and so you notice that the modern democracies emerged out of the european enlightenment
and specifically because the idea that a lot of people some huge number not a tribal number huge
number of anonymous people who don't know each other are not bonded to each other who believe
different things who grew up in different ways can all work together to make collective decisions
well that affect everybody and where some of them will make compromises and the thing that
matters to them for what matters to other strangers that's actually wild like it's a wild idea that
that would even be possible and it was kind of the result of this high enlightenment idea that
we could all do the philosophy of science and we could all do the hegelian dialectic
those ideas had emerged right and it was that we we could all so our choice making because
we said a society is trying to coordinate choice making the emergent order is the order of our
of the choices that we're making not just at the level of the individuals but what groups of
individuals corporations nation states whatever do our choices are based on our choice makings
based on our sense making and our meaning making our sense makings what do we believe is happening
in the world and what do we believe the effects of a particular thing would be our meaning making
is what do we care about right our values generation what do we care about that we're
trying to move the world in the direction of if you ultimately are trying to move the world in
a direction that is really really different than the direction i'm trying to we have very
different values we're gonna have a hard time and if you think the world is a very different
world right if you think that systemic racism is rampant everywhere and one of the worst problems
and i think it's not even a thing if you think climate change is almost existential and i think
it's not even a thing we're gonna have a really hard time coordinating and so we have to be able
to have shared sense making of can we come to understand just what is happening together and
then can we do shared values generation okay maybe i'm emphasizing a particular value more
than you but i can see how i can take your perspective and i can see how the thing that you
value is worth valuing and i can see how it's affected by this thing so can we take all the
values and try to come up with a proposition that benefits all of them better than the proposition
i created just to benefit these ones that harms the ones that you care about which is why you're
opposing my proposition yeah we don't even try in the process of crafting a proposition currently
to see and this is the reason that the proposition when we vote on it gets half the vote almost all
the time it almost never gets 90 percent of the votes is because it benefits some things and harms
other things we can say all theory of tradeoffs but we didn't even try to say could we see what
everybody cares about and see if there was a better solution so how do we fix that try i i wonder is
it is it as simple as the social technology education well no it's that the proposition
crafting and refinement process has to be key to a democracy or part of the government and it's not
currently but isn't that the humans creating that situation so one way there's two ways to fix that
as the one is to fix the individual humans which is the education early in life and the second is
to create somehow systems that yeah it's both it's both so i understand the education part
but creating systems that's why that's why i mentioned the technologies is creating
yes social networks essentially yes that's actually necessary okay so let's go to the
first part and then we'll come to the second part so democracy emerged as an enlightenment era idea
that we could all do a a dialectic and come to understand what other people valued and so that
we could actually come up with a cooperative solution rather than just fuck you we're gonna get our
thing in war right and that we could sense make together we could all apply the philosophy of
science and you weren't gonna stick to your guns on what the speed of sound is if we measured it
and we found out what it was and there's a unifying element of the objectivity in that way
and so this is why i believe jefferson said if you could give me a perfect newspaper and a
broken government or in paraphrasing or a broken government perfect newspaper i wouldn't hesitate
to take the perfect newspaper because if the people understand what's going on they can make
build a new government if they don't understand what's going on they can't possibly make good
choices and um washington i'm paraphrasing again first president said the number one aim of the
federal government should be the comprehensive education of every citizen in the science of
government science of government was the term of art think about what that means right science of
government would be game theory coordination theory history wouldn't call game theory yet
history sociology economics right all the things that lead to how we understand human
coordination i think it's so profound that he didn't say the number one aim of the federal
government is rule of law and he didn't say it's protecting the border from enemies because if
the number one aim was to protect the border from enemies it could do that as military dictatorship
quite effectively and if the goal was rule of law it could do it as a dictatorship as a police
state and so if the number one goal is anything other than the comprehensive education of all
the citizens in the science of government it won't stay democracy long you can see so both
education and the fourth estate the fourth estate being the so education can i make sense of the
world am i trained to make sense of the world the fourth estate is what's actually going on currently
the news do i have good unbiased information about it those are both considered prerequisite
institutions for democracy to even be a possibility and then at the scale it was initially suggested
here the town hall was the key phenomena where there wasn't a special interest group crafted a
proposition and the first thing i ever saw was the proposition to know anything about it and i
got a vote yes or no it was in the town hall we all got to talk about it and the proposition could
get crafted in real time through the conversation which is why there was that founding father's
statement that voting is the death of democracy voting fundamentally is polarizing the population
in some kind of sublimated war but the and we'll do that as the last step but what we want to do
first is to say how does the thing that you care about that seems damaged by this proposition how
could that turn into a solution to make this proposition better where this proposition still
tends to the thing it's trying to tend to and tends to that better can we work on this together
and that in a town hall we could have that as the scale increased we lost the ability to do that
now as you mentioned the internet could change that the fact that we had representatives that
had to ride a horse from one town hall to the other one to see what the colony would do um that
we stopped having this kind of developmental um propositional development process when the
town hall ended the fact that we have not used the internet to recreate this is
uh somewhere between insane and
aligned with class interests i would push back to say that the internet has those things it just
has a lot of other things i feel like the internet has places where that encourage synthesis of
competing ideas and uh sense making which is what we're talking about is just that it's also
flooded with a bunch of other systems that perhaps are out competing it under current
incentives perhaps has to do with capitalism in the market is the linux is awesome right and
wikipedia and places where you have and they have problems but places where you have open source
sharing of information vetting of information towards collective building is that building
something like like how much has that affected our court systems or our policing systems or our
military systems or first of all i think a lot but not not enough i i i think that's something
i told you offline yesterday's uh perhaps there's a whole nother discussion but i i don't think
we're quite quantifying the impact on the world the positive impact of wikipedia you said the
policing the i mean i just i just think the amount of um empathy that wikipedia like knowledge
i think can't help but lead to empathy just knowing okay just knowing okay i'll give you some pieces
of information knowing how many people died in various awards that already that delta when you
have millions of people have that knowledge it's like it's a little like slap in the face like oh
like my boyfriend or girlfriend breaking up with me is not such a big deal when millions
of people were tortured you know like just a little bit and when a lot of people know that
because of wikipedia uh or the effect their second order effect of wikipedia which is
it's not that necessarily people read wikipedia it's like youtubers who don't really know stuff
that well will thoroughly read a wikipedia article and create a compelling video describing
that wikipedia article that then millions of people watch and they understand that holy
shit a lot of there was such a first of all there was such a thing as world war two in world war
one okay like they can at least like learn about it they can learn about this was like recent they
can learn about slavery they can learn about all kinds of injustices in the world and that i think
has a lot of effects to our to the way whether you're a police officer uh a a lawyer a judge
in the jury or just a regular civilian citizen the way you approach the every other communication
you engage in even if the system of that communication is very much flawed so i think
there's a huge positive effect on wikipedia that's my case for wikipedia so you should
donate to wikipedia i i'm a huge fan but there's very few systems like it which is sad to me
me so i think it's it would be a useful exercise for any uh listener of the show to
really try to run the dialectical synthesis process with regard to uh a topic like this
and take the um techno concerned perspective with regard to uh information tech that folks
like tristan harris take and say what are all of the things that are getting worse
and what and are any of them following an exponential curve and how much worse how
quickly could that be and then and do that fully without mitigating it then take the
techno optimist perspective and see what things are getting better in a way that
occurs well or diamondus or someone might do and try to take that perspective fully and say
are some of those things exponential what could that portend and then try to hold all that at
the same time and i think there are ways in which depending upon the metrics we're looking at
things are getting worse on exponential curves and better on exponential curves for different
metrics at the same time which which i hold is the destabilization of previous system
and either an emergence to a better system or collapse to a lower order are both possible
and so i want my optimism not to be about my assessment i want my assessment to be just as
fucking clear as it can be i want my optimism to be what inspires the solution process on that
clear assessment so i never i never want to apply optimism in the sense making right i want to just
try to be clear if anything i want to make sure that the challenges are really well understood
but that's in service of an optimism that there are good potentials even if i don't know what
they are that are worth seeking right there's kind of a there is a some sense of optimism
that's required to even try to innovate really hard problems but then i want to take my pessimism
and read to my own optimism to see is that solution not going to work does it have second
order effects and then not get not get upset by that because i then come back to how to make it
better so that just a relationship between optimism and pessimism and the dialectic of how
they how they can work so when i of course we can say that wikipedia is a pretty awesome example
of a thing we can look at the places where it has limits or has failed where
on a celebrity topic or corporate interest topic you can pay wikipedia editors to edit
more frequently and various things like that but you can also see where there's a lot of information
that was kind of decentralized created that is good information that is more easily accessible
to people than everybody buying their own encyclopedia britannica walking down to the library
and that can be updated in real time faster and i think you're very right that the business model
is a big difference because wikipedia is not a for profit corporation it is a it's tending to
the information commons and it doesn't have an agenda other than tending to the information
commons and i think the two masters issue is a tricky one when i'm trying to optimize for very
different kinds of things where i have to sacrifice one for the other and i can't find
synergistic satisfies which one and if i have a fiduciary responsibility to shareholder
uh profit maximization and you know what what does that end up creating i think the ad model
that silicon valley took um i think jaren lanie or i don't know if you've had him on the show
but he has interesting assessment of the nature of the ad model um silicon valley wanting to
support capitalism and entrepreneurs to make things but uh also the belief that information
should be free and also the network dynamics where the more people you got on you got increased value
per user per capita as more people got on so you didn't want to do anything to slow the rate of
adoption um some places actually you know pay pal paying people money to join the network because
the uh value of the network would be there'd be a metcalf like dynamic proportional to the square
of the total number of users so um the ad model made sense of how do we make it free but also be
a business get everybody on but not really thinking about what it would mean to and this
is now the whole idea that if you aren't paying for the product you are the product um if the if
they have a fiduciary responsibility to their shareholder maximize profit their customer as the
advertiser the user who it's being built for is to do behavioral mod for them for advertisers
that's a whole different thing than that same type of tech could have been if applied with a
different business model or a different purpose um i think there's because facebook and google and
other information and communication platforms end up harvesting data about user behavior that allows
them to model who the people are in a way that gives them more sometimes specific information
and behavioral information than even a therapist or a doctor or a lawyer or a priest might have in
a different setting they basically are accessing privileged information there should be a fiduciary
responsibility and in normal fiduciary law if there's this principal agent thing if you are a
uh principal and i'm an agent on your behalf i don't have a game theoretic relationship with you
right if you're sharing something with me and i'm the priest or i'm the therapist i'm never
going to use that information to try to sell you a used car or whatever the thing is but facebook is
gathering massive amounts of privileged information and using it to modify people's behavior for a
behavior that they didn't sign up for wanting the behavior but what the corporation did so i think
this is an example of the physical tech evolving in the context of the previous social tech where
it's being shaped in particular ways and here unlike Wikipedia that evolved for the the information
commons this evolved for fulfilling particular agentic purpose most people when they're on facebook
think it's just a tool that they're using they don't realize it's an agent right it is a corporation
with a profit motive and um and as i'm interacting with it it has a goal for me different than my
goal for myself and i might want to be on for a short period of time its goal is maximize time on
site and so there is a rivalry that is taken but where there should be a fiduciary contract
i think that's actually a huge deal and i think if we said could we apply facebook like technology
to develop people's citizenry capacity right to develop their personal health and well being
in habits as well as their cognitive understanding the complexity with which they can process
the health of their relationships um that would be amazing to start to explore and this is now
the thesis that we started to discuss before is every time there is a major step function in
the physical tech it absolutes the previous social tech and the new social tech has to emerge
what i would say is that when we look at the nation state level of the world today the more
more top down authoritarian nation states are as the exponential tech started to emerge the digital
technology started to emerge they were in a position for better long term planning and better
coordination and so the authoritarian state started applying the exponential tech intentionally
to make more effective authoritarian states and that's everything from like an internet of things
surveillance system going into machine learning systems to the sesame credit system to all those
types of things and so they're upgrading their social tech using the exponential tech otherwise
within a nation state like the us but democratic open societies the countries the states are not
directing the technology in a way that makes a better open society meaning better emergent order
they're saying well the corporations are doing that and the state is doing the relatively little
thing it would do aligned with the previous corporate law that no longer is relevant because
there wasn't fiduciary responsibility for things like that there wasn't antitrust because this creates
functional monopolies because of network dynamics right where youtube has more users than bimeo and
every other video player together amazon has a bigger percentage of market share than all of the
other markets together you get one big dog per vertical because of network effect which is a
kind of organic monopoly that the previous antitrust law didn't even have a place that wasn't a thing
anti monopoly was only something that emerged in the space of government contracts so um
so what we see is the new exponential technology is being directed by authoritarian nation states
to make better authoritarian nation states and by corporations to make more powerful corporations
the powerful corporations when we think about the scottish enlightenment when the idea of
markets was being advanced the modern kind of ideas of markets the biggest corporation
was tiny compared to what the biggest corporation today is so the asymmetry of it relative to
people was tiny and the asymmetry now in terms of the total technology it employs total amount of
money total amount of information processing is so many orders of magnitude and rather than
there be demand for an authentic thing that creates a basis for supply as supply started to get way
more coordinated and powerful and the demand wasn't coordinated because you don't have a labor union
of all the customers working together but you do have a coordination on the supply side supply
started to recognize that it could manufacture demand it could make people want shit that they
didn't want before that maybe wouldn't increase their happiness in a meaningful way might increase
addiction addiction is a very good way to manufacture demand and so as soon as manufactured
demand started through this is the cool thing and you have to have it for status or whatever it is
is the intelligence of the market was breaking now it's no longer a collective intelligence system
that is up regulating real desire for things that are really meaningful you're able to hijack the
lower angels of our nature rather than the higher ones the addictive patterns drive those and have
people want shit that doesn't actually make them happier make the world better and so we really
also have to we have to update our theory of markets because a behavioral econ showed that
homo economicus the rational actor is not really a thing but particularly at greater and greater
scale can't really be a thing voluntarism isn't a thing where if my corporate if my company doesn't
want to advertise on facebook i just will lose to the companies that do because that's where
all the fucking attention is and so then i can say it's voluntary but it's not really if there's
a functional monopoly same if i'm going to sell on amazon or things like that so um what i would
say is that these corporations are becoming more powerful than nation states in some ways and
they are also debasing the integrity of the nation states the open societies so the democracies
are getting weaker as a result of exponential tech and the kind of new tech companies that are
kind of a new feudalism tech feudalism because it's not a democracy inside of a tech company
or the supply and demand relationship when you have manufactured demand and kind of
monopoly type functions and so we have basically a new feudalism controlling exponential tech
and authoritarian nation states controlling it and those attractors are both shitty and so i'm
interested in the application of exponential tech to making better social tech that makes
emergent order possible and where then that emergent order can bind and direct the exponential
tech in fundamentally healthy not x risk oriented directions i think the relationship of social
tech and physical tech can make it i think we can actually use the physical tech to make better
social tech but it's not given that we do if we don't make better social tech then i think the
physical tech empowers really shitty social tech that is not a world that we want i don't know if
it's the road we want to go down but i tend to believe that the market will create exactly the
thing you're talking about which i feel like there's a lot of money to be made in creating
a social tech that creates a better citizen that creates a better human being
this uh the your description of facebook and so on which is a system that creates addiction
which manufacturers demand is not obviously inherently the consequence of the market like i
feel like that's the the first stage of us like baby deer trying to figure out how to use the
internet i i feel like there's much more money to be made with something that creates
compersion and love honestly i mean i i really from we can have this i can make the business
case for it i don't know i don't think we want to really have that discussion but don't do you
have some hope that that's the case and i guess if not then how do we fix the system of markets that
works so well for the united states for so long like i said every social tech worked for a while
like tribalism worked well for two or three hundred thousand years i think social tech has
to keep evolving the social technologies with which we organize and coordinate our behavior
have to keep evolving as our physical tech does um so i think the thing that we call markets
of course we can try to say oh even biology runs on markets and but the thing that we call
markets the underlying theory homo economicist demand driving supply that thing broke
it broke with scale in particular um and a few other things so it needs updated in a really
fundamental way um i think there's something even deeper than making money happening that in some
ways will obsolete money making i think capitalism is not about business
so if you think about business i'm going to produce a good or a service that people want and
bring it to the market so that people get access to that good or service that's the world of business
but that's not capitalism capitalism is the management and allocation of capital which
financial services was a tiny percentage of the total market has become a huge
percentage of the total market it's a different creature so if i was in business and i was producing
a good or service and i was saving up enough money that i started to be able to invest that money and
gain interest or do things like that i start realizing i'm making more money on my money
than i'm making on producing the goods and services so i stop even paying attention to goods and
services and start paying attention to making money on money and how do i utilize capital to
create more capital and capital gives me more optionality because i can buy anything with it
than a particular good or service that only some people want capitalism more capital ended up
meaning more control i could put more people under my employment i could buy larger pieces of land
novel access to resource mines and put more technology under my employment so it meant
increased agency and also increased control i think attentionalism is even more powerful
so rather than enslave people where the people kind of always want to get away and put in
the least work they can there's a way in which economic servitude was just more profitable
than slavery right have the people work even harder voluntarily because they want to get ahead
and nobody has to be there to whip them or control them or whatever this is a a cynical
take but a meaningful take so people so capital is a way to influence human behavior right and yet
where people still feel free in some meaningful way they they're not feeling like they're going
to be punished by the state if they don't do something it's like punished by the market be a
homelessness or something but the market is this invisible thing i can't put an agent on so it feels
like free and so if if you want to affect people's behavior and still have them feel
free capital ends up being a way to do that but i think affecting their attention is even deeper
because if i can affect their attention i can both affect what they want and what they believe
and what they feel and we statistically know this very clearly facebook has done studies
that based on changing the feed it can change beliefs emotional dispositions etc and so i think
there's a way that the the harvest and directing of attention is even a more powerful system than
capitalism it is effective in capitalism to generate capital but i think it also generates
influence beyond what capital can do and so do we want to have some groups utilizing that type
of tech to direct other people's attention if so um towards what towards what metrics of what a good
civilization and good human life would be what's the oversight process what is the
transparency i can i can i can answer all the things you're mentioning uh i i can build i
guarantee you if i am not such a lazy ass i'll be part of the many people doing this as transparency
and control i get to giving control to individual people okay so maybe the corporation has coordination
on its goals that all of its customers or users together don't have so there's some asymmetry
where it's uh asymmetry of its goals but maybe i could actually help all of the customers to
coordinate almost like a labor union or whatever by informing and educating them adequately about
the effects the externalities on them if this is not toxic waste going into the ocean of the
atmosphere it's their their minds their beings their families their relationships um such that
they will in group change their behavior and um i think the i one way of saying what you're saying
i think is that you think that you can rescue homo economicus from uh the the rational actor
that will pursue all the goods and services and choose the best one at the best price the kind
of rand von mises hayek that you can rescue that from dan arielli and behavioral econ that says
that's actually not how people make choices they make it based on status hacking largely
whether it's good for them or not in the long term and the large asymmetric corporation can run
propaganda and narrative warfare that hits people's status buttons and their limbic hijacks and
their lots of other things in ways that they can't even perceive that are happening um they're not
paying attention to that the site is employing psychologists and split testing and whatever
else so you're saying i think we can recover homo economicus and not just through a single
like mechanism technology there's there's the uh not to keep mentioning the guy but platforms like
georogan and so on that that make help make viral the ways that the education of negative
externalities can become viral in this world so interestingly i actually agree with you that
i got him that we four and a half hours in that we can that can do some good all right well see
what you're talking about is the application of tech here broadcast tech where you can speak to a
lot of people and that's not going to be strong enough because the different people need spoken
too differently which means it has to be different voices that get amplified to those audiences more
like facebook's tech but nonetheless we'll start with broadcast tech plants the first seed and then
the word of mouth is a powerful thing you need to do the first broadcast shotgun and then it like
lands a catapult of whatever i don't know what the right weapon is but then it just spreads the word
of mouth through all kinds of tech including facebook so let's come back to the fundamental
thing the fundamental thing is we want to kind of order at various scales from the conflicting
parts of ourselves actually having more harmony than they might have to family extended family
local all the way up to global we want emergent order where our choices
have more alignment right we want that to be emergent rather than imposed or rather than
we want fundamentally different things or make totally different sense of the world where
warfare of some kind becomes the only solution emergent order requires us in our choice making
requires us being able to have related sense making and related meaning making processes
can we apply digital technologies and exponential tech in general to try to increase the capacity
to do that where the technology called a town hall the social tech that we'd all get together
and talk obviously is very scale limited and it's also oriented to geography rather than
networks of aligned interest can we build new better versions of those types of things and
going back to the idea that a democracy or participatory governance depends upon comprehensive
education in the science of government which include being able to understand things like
asymmetric information warfare on the side of governments and how the people can organize
adequately can you utilize some of the technologies now to be able to support increased comprehensive
education of the people and maybe comprehensive informatness so both fixing the decay in both
education in the fourth estate that have happened so the people can start self organizing to then
influence the corporations the nation states to do different things and or build new ones
themselves yeah fundamentally that's the thing that has to happen we the exponential tech gives
us a novel problem landscape that the world never had the nuke gave us a novel problem landscape
and so that required this whole Bretton Woods world the exponential tech gives us novel problem
landscape our existing problem solving processes aren't doing a good job we have had more countries
get nukes we haven't a nuclear deep proliferation we haven't achieved any of the UN sustainable
development goals we haven't kept any of the new categories of tech for making arms races so our
global coordination is not adequate to the problem landscape so we need fundamentally better problem
solving processes a market or a state is a problem solving process we need better ones that can do
the speed and scale of the current issues right now speed is one of the other big things is that
by the time we regulated DDT out of existence or cigarettes not for people under 18 they'd
already killed so many people and we let the market do the thing but as Elon has made the
point that won't work for AI by the time we recognize afterwards that we have an auto
poetic AI that's a problem you won't be able to reverse it that there's a number of things that
when you're dealing with tech that is either self replicating and disintermediate humans to keep
going doesn't need humans to keep going or you have tech that just has exponentially fast effects
your regulation has to come early it can't come after the effects have happened the negative
effects have happened if because the negative effects could be too big too quickly so we
basically need new problem solving processes that do better at being able to internalize
externality solve the problems on the right time scale and the right geographic scale
and those new processes to not be imposed have to emerge from people wanting them
and being able to participate in their development which is what I would call kind of
a new cultural enlightenment or renaissance that has to happen where people start understanding
the new power that exponential tech offers the way that it is actually damaging
current governance structures that we care about and creating an extra scale landscape but could
also be redirected towards more protopic purposes and then saying how do we rebuild new social
institutions what are adequate social institutions where we can do participatory governance at
scale and time and how can the people actually participate to build those things I the the
solution that I see working requires a process like that and the result maximizes love so again
Elon would be right that love is the answer let me take it back from the scale of societies
to the scale that's far far more important which is the scale of family you've written a blog post
about your dad we have various flavors of relationships with our fathers what have you
learned about life when your dad well people can read the blog post and see a lot of individual
things that I learned that I really appreciated if I was to kind of summarize at a high level
I had a really incredible dad like very very unusually a positive set of experiences
as he was committed we were homeschooled and he was committed to work from home to be available
and like prioritize fathering in a really deep way
and you know as a super gifted super loving very unique man he also had his unique issues that
were part of what crafted the unique brilliance and those things often go together and I say that
because I think I had had some unusual gifts and also some unusual difficulties and I think
it's useful for everybody to know their path probably has both of those but
if I was to say kind of at the essence of one of the things my dad taught me across a lot of
lessons was like a the intersection of self empowerment ideas and practices that self empower
towards collective good towards some virtuous purpose beyond the self and he both said that
a million different ways taught it in a million different ways when we were doing construction
and he was teaching me how to build a house we were putting the wires to the walls before
the drywall went on he made sure that the way that we put the wires through is beautiful
like the that the height of the holes was similar that we twisted the wires in a particular way
that and it's like no one's ever going to see it and he's like if a job's worth doing it's worth
doing well and excellence is its own reward and those types of ideas and if there was a really
shitty job to do he'd say see the job do the job stay out of the misery just don't indulge
any negativity do the things that need done and so there's like a there's an empowerment
and a nobility together um and yeah extraordinarily fortunate is there ways you think you could have
been a better son is there things you regret it's an interesting question let me first say
just as a bit of a criticism that uh what kind of man do you think you are not wearing a suit
and tie a real man should exactly uh i grew with your dad on that point you mentioned offline that
he suggested a real man should wear a suit and tie
but outside of that is there ways you could have been a better son maybe next time on your show
i'll wear a suit and tie my dad would be happy about that um please
i can answer the question later in life not early um i had just a huge amount of respect
and reverence for my dad when i was young so i was asking myself that question a lot so i
weren't a lot of things i knew that i wasn't seeking to apply um
there was a phase when i went through my kind of individuation differentiation
where i had to make him excessively wrong about too many things um i don't think i had to but i did
and he had a lot of kind of non standard model beliefs about things whether early
kind of ancient civilizations or ideas on evolutionary theory or alternate models of physics and
and um and they weren't irrational but they didn't all have the standard of
epistemic proof that i would need and i went through and some of more kind of spiritual
ideas as well i went through a phase in my early 20s where i kind of had that the attitude that
Dawkins or Christopher Hitchens has that can kind of be um like excessively certain and sanctimonious
applying their reductionist philosophy of science to everything and kind of brutally dismissive
i'm embarrassed by that phase um not to say anything about those men in their path but
but for myself and so during that time i was more dismissive of my dad's epistemology than i
would have liked to have been i gotta correct that later apologize for it but that's the first
thought that came to mind you've written the following i've had the experience countless
times making love watching a sunset listening to music feeling the breeze that i would sign up for
this whole life and all of its pains just to experience this exact moment this is a kind of
worldless knowing it's the most important and real truth i know that experience itself is infinitely
meaningful and pain is temporary and seen clearly even the suffering is filled with beauty i've
experienced countless lives worth of moments worthy of life such an unreasonable fortune
a few words of gratitude from you beautifully written is there some beautiful moments now you
have uh experienced countless lives worth of those moments but there are some things that um if you
could uh in your darker moments you can go to to relive to remind yourself that the whole ride is
worthwhile maybe skip the making love part we don't know about that i mean i i feel i feel
unreasonably fortunate that it is a such a humongous list because i mean i feel fortunate to
have like had exposure to practices and philosophies in a way of seeing things it makes me see things
that way so i can take response way for seeing things in that way and not taking for granted
really wonderful things but i can't take credit for being exposed to the philosophies that even
gave me that possibility um you know it's not just with my wife it's with every person who i
really love when we're talking i look at their face i in the context of a conversation feel
overwhelmed by how lucky i am to get to know them and like that there's never been someone like them
in all of history and there never will be again and they might be gone tomorrow i might be gone
tomorrow and like i get this moment with them and when you take in the uniqueness of that fully
and the beauty of it it's overwhelmingly beautiful and you remember the first time i did a big dose
of mushrooms and i was looking at a tree for a long time and i was just crying with overwhelming
how beautiful the tree was and it was a tree outside the front of my house that i'd walk
by a million times and never looked at like this and it wasn't the dose of mushrooms where
where i was hallucinating like where the tree was purple like the tree still looked like if i had
to describe it say it's green and it has leaves looks like this but it was way fucking more beautiful
like like capturing than it normally was and i'm like why is it so beautiful if i would describe
it the same way and i realized i had no thoughts taking me anywhere else yeah like what it seemed
like the mushrooms were doing was just actually shutting the narrative off that would have me
be distracted so i could really see the tree and then i'm like fuck when i get off these mushrooms
i'm going to practice seeing the tree because it's always that beautiful and i just miss it
and so i practice being with it and quieting the rest of the mind and then being like wow
and and if it's not mushrooms like people have peak experiences where they'll see life and how
incredible it is it's always there it's funny that i had this exact same experience and the
on quite a lot of mushrooms just sitting alone and looking at a tree and exactly as you described it
uh appreciating the beauty undistorted beauty of it and it's funny to me that here's two humans
very different with very different journeys where at some moment in time both looking at a tree like
idiots for hours and just in awe and and happy to be alive and yeah and uh even just that moment
alone is is worth living for but you did say humans and we have a moment together as two humans
and you mentioned shots that uh well have to ask what uh what are we looking at when i went to go
get a smoothie before coming here i got you a keto smoothie that you didn't want because you're not
just keto but fasting but i saw the thing with you and your dad where you did uh shots together
yeah and this place happened to have shots of um ginger turmeric cayenne juice of some kind and so
i with some himaly and salt i didn't necessarily plan it for being on the show i just brought it
wow but we can we can do it that way i think we should we shall uh we shall toast like heroes
daniel it's a huge honor what do we toast to we toast to this moment this this this unique
moment that we get to share together i'm very grateful to be here in this moment with you and
uh yeah gratefully you invited me here we met for the first time and i will never be the same
for the good and the bad but i am
that is really interesting that feels way healthier than the vodka my dad and i were drinking
so i feel like a better man already daniel this is one of the best conversations i've ever had
i can't wait to have many more likewise this is uh it's been an amazing experience thank you for
wasting all your time today i want to say in terms of what you're mentioning about
like the that you work in machine learning and the optimism that wants to look at the issues
but wants to look at how this increased technological power could be applied to solving them and that
even thinking about the broadcast of like can i help people understand the issues better and help
organize them like fundamentally you're you're oriented like wikipedia what i see to really try
to tend to the information commons without another agentic interest distorting it and for you to be
able to get guys like lee smolen and roger pennrose and like the the the greatest thinkers of
litter alive and you know have them on the show and most people would never be exposed to them and
talk about it in a way that people can understand uh i think it's an incredible service i think you're
doing great work so i was really happy to hear from you thank you daniel thanks for listening
to this conversation with daniel schmockdenberger and thank you to ground news net suite for
sigmatic magic spoon and better help check them out in the description to support this podcast and
now let me leave you with some words from albert einstein i know not with what weapons world war
three will be fought but world war four will be fought with sticks and stones thank you for listening
and hope to see you next time